'tis a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of
a good fortune, must be in want of a wife. 

 However little known
t'feelings/views of such a man may be on his first entering a
neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in t'minds of t'surrounding
families, that he's considered t'rightful property of some one/other of
their daughters. “Why, my dear, you must know, Long says that Netherfield
is taken by a young man of large fortune from t'north of England; that he
came down on Monday in a chaise, four t'see t'place, was so much delighted
with it, that he agreed with Morris immediately; that he is t'take
possession before Michaelmas, some of his servants are to be in t'house by
t'end of next week.” William, Lucas are determined to go, merely on that
account, for in general, you know, they visit no newcomers. 

 Bingley
will be very glad t'see you; I'll send a few lines by you t'assure him of
my hearty consent t'his marrying whichever he chooses of t'girls; though I
must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.” 

 Bennet was so odd a
mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour, reserve, caprice, that
t'experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient t'make his
wife understand his character. 

 Observing his second daughter employed
in trimming a hat, he suddenly addressed her with: 

 But if we don't
venture somebody else will; after all, Long, her neices must stand their
chance; and, therefore, as she'll think it an act of kindness, if you
decline t'office, I'll take it on myself.” For you're a young lady of deep
reflection, I know, read great books, make extracts.” 

 “Now, Kitty, you
may cough as much as you choose,” said Bennet; and, as he spoke, he left
t'room, fatigued with t'raptures of his wife. 

 At our time of life
'tisn't so pleasant, I can tell you, t'be making new acquaintances every
day; but for your sakes, we'd do anything. Not all that Bennet with
t'assistance of her five daughters, could ask on t'subject, was sufficient
t'draw from her husband any satisfactory description of Bingley. They
attacked him in various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious
suppositions, and distant surmises; but he eluded t'skill of them all,
they were at last obliged t'accept t'second-hand intelligence of their
neighbour, Lucas. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremely
agreeable, and, t'crown t'whole, he meant t'be at t'next assembly with a
large party. 

 T'be fond of dancing was a certain step towards falling in
love; lively hopes of Bingley’s heart were entertained. “If I can but see
one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,” said Bennet t'her
husband, “and all t'others equally well married, I'll haven'thing t'wish
for.” 

 In a few days Bingley returned Bennet’s visit, sat about ten
minutes with him in his library. T'ladies were somewhat more fortunate,
for they'd t'advantage of ascertaining from an upper window that he wore a
blue coat, rode a black horse. An invitation t'dinner was soon afterwards
dispatched; already had Bennet planned t'courses that were t'do credit
t'her housekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. 

 She
couldn't imagine what business he could've in town so soon after his
arrival in Hertfordshire; she began t'fear that he might be always flying
about from one place t'another, never settled at Netherfield as he ought
t'be. Lucas quieted her fears a little by starting t'idea of his being
gone t'London only t'get a large party for t'ball; a report soon followed
that Bingley was t'bring twelve ladies, seven gentlemen with him
t't'assembly. 

 T'girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were
comforted the day before t'ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he
brought only six with him from London--his five sisters, a cousin. 

 And
when t'party entered t'assembly room it consisted of only five altogether
--Bingley, his two sisters, t'husband of t'eldest, and another young man.
His brother-in-law, Hurst, merely looked t'gentleman; but his friend Darcy
soon drew t'attention of t'room by his fine, tall person, handsome
features, noble mien, and t'report which was in general circulation within
five minutes after his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year.
T'gentlemen pronounced him t'be a fine figure of a man, t'ladies declared
he was much handsomer than Bingley, he was looked at with great admiration
for about half t'evening, till his manners gave a disgust which turned
t'tide of his popularity; for he was discovered t'be proud; t'be above his
company, above being pleased; not all his large estate in Derbyshire could
then save him from having a most forbidding, disagreeable countenance,
being unworthy t'be compared with his friend. 

 Darcy danced only once
with Hurst, once with Bingley, declined being introduced t'any other lady,
spent t'rest of t'evening in walking about t'room, speaking occasionally
t'one of his own party. Amongst t'most violent against him was Bennet,
whose dislike of his general behaviour was sharpened int'particular
resentment by his having slighted one of her daughters. Elizabeth Bennet'd
been obliged, by t'scarcity of gentlemen, t'sit down for two dances;
during part of that time, Darcy'd been standing near enough for her t'hear
a conversation between him, Bingley, who came from t'dance for a few
minutes, t'press his friend t'join it. 

 Upon my honour, I never met with
so many pleasant girls in my life as I've this evening; there're several
of them you see uncommonly pretty.” 

 “Which do you mean?”, turning round
he looked for a moment at Elizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew
his own, coldly said: “She's tolerable, but not handsome enough t'tempt
me; I am in no humour at present t'give consequence t'young ladies who're
slighted by other men. She told t'story, however, with great spirit among
her friends; for she'd a lively, playful disposition, which delighted in
anything ridiculous. 

 Mary'd heard herself mentioned t'Bingley as t'most
accomplished girl in t'neighbourhood; Catherine, Lydia'd been fortunate
enough never t'be without partners, which was all that they had yet learnt
t'care for at a ball. With a book he was regardless of time; on t'present
occasion he'd a good deal of curiosity as t't'event of an evening which'd
raised such splendid expectations. Then t'two third he danced with King,
and t'two fourth with Maria Lucas, t'two fifth with Jane again, and t'two
sixth with Lizzy, t'Boulanger--” 

 She was therefore obliged t'seek
another branch of t'subject, related, with much bitterness of spirit, some
exaggeration, t'shocking rudeness of Darcy. 

 “But I can assure you that
Lizzy doesn't lose much by not suiting his fancy; for he's a most
disagreeable, horrid man, not at all worth pleasing. 

 When Jane,
Elizabeth were alone, t'former, who'd been cautious in her praise of
Bingley before, expressed t'her sister just how very much she admired him.
“He's just what a young man ought t'be sensible, good-humoured, lively; I
never saw such happy manners!--so much ease, with such perfect good
breeding!” Bingley is t'live with her brother, keep his house; I am much
mistaken if we shan't find a charming neighbour in her.” 

 Elizabeth
listened in silence, but wasn't convinced; their behaviour at t'assembly
hadn't been calculated t'please in general; with more quickness of
observation, less pliancy of temper than her sister, and with a judgement
too unassailed by any attention t'herself, she was little disposed
t'approve them. 

 They were in fact fine ladies; not deficient in good
humour when they were pleased, nor in the power of making themselves
agreeable when they chose it, but proud and conceited. 

 They were rather
handsome,'d been educated in one of the first private seminaries in
town,'d a fortune of twenty thousand pounds, were in t'habit of spending
more than they ought, of associating with people of rank, were therefore
in every respect entitled t'think well of themselves, meanly of others.
They were of a respectable family in t'north of England; a circumstance
more deeply impressed on their memories than that their brother’s fortune,
their own'd been acquired by trade. Bingley inherited property t't'amount
of nearly a hundred thousand pounds from his father, who'd intended
t'purchase an estate, but didn't live t'do it. 

 Bingley intended it
likewise, and sometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now
provided with a good house, t'liberty of a manor, 'twas doubtful t'many of
those who best knew t'easiness of his temper, whether he mightn't spend
the remainder of his days at Netherfield, leave t'next generation to
purchase. 

 His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own;
but, though he was now only established as a tenant, Bingley was by no
means unwilling t'preside at his table--nor was Hurst, who'd married a man
of more fashion than fortune, less disposed t'consider his house as her
home when it suited her. Bingley hadn't been of age two years, when he was
tempted by an accidental recommendation t'look at Netherfield House.
Bingley was sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was
continually giving offense. Bingley'd never met with more pleasant people
or prettier girls in his life; everybody'd been most kind, attentive
t'him; there'd been no formality, no stiffness; he'd soon felt acquainted
with all t'room; and, as t'Bennet, he couldn't conceive an angel more
beautiful. Darcy, on t'contrary,'d seen a collection of people in whom
there was little beauty, no fashion, for none of whom he'd felt t'smallest
interest, from none received either attention/pleasure. 

 Hurst, her
sister allowed it t'be so--but still they admired her, liked her,
pronounced her t'be a sweet girl, one whom they'd not object t'know more
of. Bennet was therefore established as a sweet girl, their brother felt
authorized by such commendation t'think of her as he chose. 

 William
Lucas'd been formerly in trade in Meryton, where he'd made a tolerable
fortune, risen t'the honour of knighthood by an address t't'king during
his mayoralty. It'd given him a disgust t'his business, t'his residence in
a small market town; and, in quitting them both, he'd removed with his
family t'a house about a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period
Lucas Lodge, where he could think with pleasure of his own importance,
and, unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil t'all
t'world. 

 By nature inoffensive, friendly, obliging, his presentation at
St. James’s'd made him courteous. 

 Robinson’s asking him how he liked
our Meryton assemblies, whether he didn't think there were a great many
pretty women in t'room, which he thought t'prettiest? “Darcy isn't so well
worth listening t'as his friend, is he?--poor Eliza!--t'be only just
tolerable.” 

 “I beg you'dn't put it int'Lizzy’s head t'be vexed by his
ill-treatment, for he's such a disagreeable man, that it'd be quite a
misfortune t'be liked by him. 

 Long told me last night that he sat close
t'her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.” 

 “Aye--because
she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, he couldn't help answering
her; but she said he seemed quite angry at being spoke to.” 

 But I can
guess how it was; everybody says that he's eat up with pride,  he'd heard
somehow that Long doesn't keep a carriage,'d come to t'ball in a hack
chaise.” 

 One cannot wonder that so very fine a young man, with family,
fortune, everything in his favour, should think highly of himself. 

 By
all that I've ever read, I am convinced that 'tis common ; that human
nature is particularly prone t'it, that there're few of us who don't
cherish a feeling of self-complacency on t'score of some quality/other,
real/imaginary. Bennet’s pleasing manners grew on t'goodwill of Hurst,
Bingley; though t'mother was found t'be intolerable, t'younger sisters not
worth speaking to, a wish of being better acquainted with them was
expressed towards t'two eldest. 

 By Jane, this attention was received
with t'greatest pleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in
their treatment of everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, couldn't
like them; though their kindness t'Jane, such as 'twas,'d a value as
arising in all probability from t'influence of their brother’s admiration.
It was generally evident whenever they met, that he did admire her and
t'her 'twas equally evident that Jane was yielding t't'preference which
she'd begun t'entertain for him from t'first, was in a way t'be much in
love; but she considered with pleasure that it wasn't likely t'be
discovered by t'world in general, since Jane united, with great strength
of feeling, a composure of temper, a uniform cheerfulness of manner which
would guard her from t'suspicions of t'impertinent. If a woman conceals
her affection with t'same skill from t'object of it, she may lose
t'opportunity of fixing him; and it'll then be but poor consolation
t'believe t'world equally in t'dark. We can all begin freely--a slight
preference is natural enough; but there're very few of us who've heart
enough t'be really in love without encouragement. But, though Bingley,
Jane meet tolerably often, 'tis never for many hours together; and, as
they always see each other in large mixed parties, 'tis impossible that
every moment should be employed in conversing together. “Yes; these four
evenings have enabled them t'ascertain that they both like Vingt-un better
than Commerce; but with respect t'any other leading characteristic, I
don't imagine that much has been unfolded.” 

 “Well I wish Jane success
with all my heart; and if she were married t'him to-morrow, I should think
she'd as good a chance of happiness as if she were t'be studying his
character for a twelvemonth. 

 Occupied in observing Bingley’s attentions
t'her sister, Elizabeth was far from suspecting that she was herself
becoming an object of some interest in t'eyes of his friend. But no
sooner'd he made it clear t'himself, his friends that she hardly had a
good feature in her face, than he began t'find 'twas rendered uncommonly
intelligent by t'beautiful expression of her dark eyes. Though he'd
detected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetry in
her form, he was forced t'acknowledge her figure t'be light and pleasing;
in spite of his asserting that her manners weren't those of t'fashionable
world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. On his approaching them
soon afterwards, though without seeming t'have any intention of speaking,
Lucas defied her friend t'mention such a subject t'him; which immediately
provoking Elizabeth t'do it, she turned t'him, said: 

 “Did you not
think, Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonly well just now, when I was
teasing Colonel Forster t'give us a ball at Meryton?” 

 If my vanity'd
taken a musical turn, you'd've been invaluable; but as 'tis, I'd really
rather not sit down before those who must be in t'habit of hearing t'best
performers.” On Lucas’s persevering, however, she added, “Very well, if it
must be so, it must.” And gravely glancing at Darcy, “There's a fine old
saying, which everybody here is of course familiar with: ‘Keep your breath
t'cool your porridge’; I shall keep mine t'swell my song.” After a song or
two, before she could reply t't'entreaties of several that she'd sing
again, she was eagerly succeeded at t'instrument by her sister Mary, who
having, in consequence of being t'only plain one in t'family, worked hard
for knowledge, accomplishments, was always impatient for display.
Mary'd neither genius nor taste; though vanity'd given her application,
it'd given her likewise a pedantic air, conceited manner, which'd've
injured a higher degree of excellence than she had reached. Elizabeth,
easy, unaffected,'d been listened t'with much more pleasure, though not
playing half so well; Mary, at the end of a long concerto, was glad
t'purchase praise, gratitude by Scotch, Irish airs, at t'request of her
younger sisters, who, with some of t'Lucases, two/three officers, joined
eagerly in dancing at one end of t'room. 

 “Your friend performs
delightfully,” he continued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join t'group;
“and I doubt not that you're an adept in t'science yourself, Darcy.”
“I'd once'd some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fond of
superior society; but I didn't feel quite certain that t'air of London
would agree with Lucas.” He paused in hopes of an answer; but his
companion wasn't disposed t'make any; Elizabeth at that instant moving
towards them, he was struck with t'action of doing a gallant thing, called
out to her: You cannot refuse t'dance, I am sure when so much beauty is
before you.” And, taking her hand, he'd've given it t'Darcy who, though
extremely surprised, wasn't unwilling t'receive it, when she instantly
drew back, said with some discomposure t'William: “You excel so much in
t'dance, Eliza, that 'tis cruel t'deny me t'happiness of seeing you;
though this gentleman dislikes the amusement in general, he can have no
objection, I am sure, t'oblige us for one half-hour.” I've been meditating
on t'great pleasure which a pair of fine eyes in t'face of a pretty woman
can bestow.” 

 Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, desired he
would tell her what lady'd t'credit of inspiring such reflections. He
listened t'her with perfect indifference while she chose to entertain
herself in this manner; as his composure convinced her that all was safe,
her wit flowed long. 

 Bennet’s property consisted almost entirely in an
estate of two thousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was
entailed, in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; their mother’s
fortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supply
t'deficiency of his. She'd a sister married t'a Phillips, who'd been a
clerk to their father, succeeded him in t'business, a brother settled in
London in a respectable line of trade. 

 T'village of Longbourn was only
one mile from Meryton; a most convenient distance for t'young ladies, who
were usually tempted thither three/four times a week, t'pay their duty
t'their aunt and t'a milliner’s shop just over t'way. 

 T'two youngest of
t'family, Catherine, Lydia, were particularly frequent in these
attentions; their minds were more vacant than their sisters’, when nothing
better offered, a walk t'Meryton was necessary t'amuse their morning
hours, furnish conversation for t'evening; however bare of news t'country
in general might be, they always contrived t'learn some from their aunt.
At present, they were well supplied both with news, happiness by t'recent
arrival of a militia regiment in the neighbourhood; 'twas t'remain t'whole
winter, Meryton was the headquarters. They could talk of nothing but
officers; and Bingley’s large fortune, t'mention of which gave animation
t'their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed t'the regimentals
of an ensign. Catherine was disconcerted, made no answer; but Lydia, with
perfect indifference, continued t'express her admiration of Captain
Carter, and her hope of seeing him in t'course of t'day, as he was going
the next morning t'London. I had hoped that our sentiments coincided in
every particular, but I must so far differ from you as t'think our two
youngest daughters uncommonly foolish.” I remember t'time when I liked a
red coat myself well--and, so I do still at my heart; if a smart young
colonel, with five/six thousand a year, should want one of my girls I'll
not say nay t'him; I thought Colonel Forster looked becoming t'other night
at William’s in his regimentals.” 

 Bennet’s eyes sparkled with pleasure,
she was eagerly calling out, while her daughter read, “If you'ren't so
compassionate as t'dine to-day with Louisa, me, we shall be in danger of
hating each other for t'rest of our lives, for a whole day’s tete-a-tete
between two women can never end without a quarrel. 

 Jane was therefore
obliged t'go on horseback, her mother attended her t't'door with many
cheerful prognostics of a bad day. They insist also on my seeing Jones--
therefore don't be alarmed if you should hear of his having been t'me--
and, excepting a sore throat, headache, there'sn't much the matter with
me.--Yours, etc.” “Well, my dear,” said Bennet, when Elizabeth'd read
t'note aloud, “if your daughter should've a dangerous fit of illness--if
she should die, it'd be a comfort t'know that 'twas all in pursuit of
Bingley, under your orders.” 

 “I admire t'activity of your benevolence
but every impulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my
opinion, exertion should always be in proportion t'what's required.” In
Meryton they parted; t'two youngest repaired t't'lodgings of one of
t'officers’ wives, Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossing field
after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles, springing over puddles
with impatient activity, finding herself at last within view of t'house,
with weary ankles, dirty stockings, a face glowing with t'warmth of
exercise. That she should've walked three miles so early in t'day, in such
dirty weather, by herself, was almost incredible t'Hurst and Bingley;
Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contempt for it. 

 T'former
was divided between admiration of the brilliancy which exercise'd given
t'her complexion, doubt as t't'occasion’s justifying her coming so far
alone. 

 Elizabeth was glad t'be taken t'her immediately; Jane, who'd
only been withheld by t'fear of giving alarm/inconvenience from expressing
in her note how much she longed for such a visit, was delighted at her
entrance. 

 She wasn't equal, however, t'much conversation, when Bingley
left them together, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude
for the extraordinary kindness she was treated with. 

 When breakfast was
over they were joined by t'sisters; Elizabeth began t'like them herself,
when she saw how much affection and solicitude they showed for Jane.
T'apothecary came, having examined his patient, said, as might be
supposed, that she'd caught a violent cold, that they must endeavour t'get
t'better of it; advised her t'return t'bed, promised her some draughts.
Elizabeth didn't quit her room for a moment; nor were t'other ladies often
absent; t'gentlemen being out, they'd, in fact, nothing t'do elsewhere.
Elizabeth most thankfully consented, a servant was dispatched to Longbourn
t'acquaint t'family with her stay, bring back a supply of clothes.
T't'civil inquiries which then poured in, amongst which she'd t'pleasure
of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Bingley’s, she couldn't
make a very favourable answer. His anxiety for Jane was evident, his
attentions t'herself most pleasing, they prevented her feeling herself so
much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. Bingley
was engrossed by Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; as for Hurst, by whom
Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, play
at cards; who, when he found her t'prefer a plain dish t'a ragout,
hadn'thing t'say t'her. Her manners were pronounced t'be bad , a mixture
of pride, impertinence; she'd no conversation, no style, no beauty. “You
observed it, Darcy, I am sure, I am inclined t'think that you'dn't wish
t'see your sister make such an exhibition.” 

 “I've an excessive regard
for Jane Bennet, she's really a very sweet girl, I wish with all my heart
she were well settled. 

 “But it must materially lessen their chance of
marrying men of any consideration in t'world,” replied Darcy. T'this
speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty
assent, indulged their mirth for some time at t'expense of their dear
friend’s vulgar relations. With a renewal of tenderness they returned
t'her room on leaving t'dining-parlour, sat with her till summoned
t'coffee. She was still poorly, Elizabeth wouldn't quit her at all, till
late in t'evening, when she'd t'comfort of seeing her sleep, and when it
seemed t'her rather right than pleasant that she should go downstairs
herself. 

 On entering t'drawing-room she found t'whole party at loo, was
immediately invited t'join them; but suspecting them t'be playing high she
declined it, making her sister the excuse, said she'd amuse herself for
t'short time she could stay below, with a book. “And I wish my collection
were larger for your benefit, my own credit; but I am an idle fellow,
though I'ven't many, I've more than I ever looked into.” 

 Elizabeth was
so much caught with what passed, as t'leave her very little attention for
her book; soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near t'card-table,
stationed herself between Bingley, his eldest sister, t'observe t'game. I
scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, I am sure I never heard a
young lady spoken of for t'first time, without being informed that she was
accomplished.” A woman must've a thorough knowledge of music, singing,
drawing, dancing, t'modern languages, t'deserve t'word; besides all this,
she must possess a certain something in her air, manner of walking, t'tone
of her voice, her address, expressions,/t'word will be but half-deserved.”
“Elizabeth Bennet,” said Bingley, when t'door was closed on her, “is one
of those young ladies who seek t'recommend themselves t'the other sex by
undervaluing their own; with many men,  it succeeds. “Undoubtedly,”
replied Darcy, t'whom this remark was chiefly addressed, “there's a
meanness in all t'arts which ladies sometimes condescend t'employ for
captivation. Bingley urged Jones being sent for immediately; while his
sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service,
recommended an express t'town for one of t'most eminent physicians.
This she'd not hear of; but she wasn't so unwilling t'comply with their
brother’s proposal; 'twas settled that Jones should be sent for early in
t'morning, if Bennet weren't decidedly better. They solaced their
wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no
better relief t'his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions
that every attention might be paid t't'sick lady, her sister. 

 In spite
of this amendment she requested t'have a note sent t'Longbourn, desiring
her mother t'visit Jane, form her own judgement of her situation. Had she
found Jane in any apparent danger, Bennet'd've been very miserable; but
being satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she'd no
wish of her recovering immediately, as her restoration t'health would
probably remove her from Netherfield. She wouldn't listen, therefore,
t'her daughter’s proposal of being carried home; neither did t'apothecary,
who arrived about t'same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a
little while with Jane, on Bingley’s appearance, invitation, t'mother,
three daughters all attended her int't'breakfast parlour. “You may depend
upon it, Madam,” said Bingley, with cold civility, “that Bennet will
receive every possible attention while she remains with us.” 

 “I am sure
if 'twasn't for such good friends I don't know what would become of her,
for she's ill , suffers a vast deal, though with t'greatest patience in
t'world, which's always t'way with her, for she's, without exception,
t'sweetest temper I've ever met with. Elizabeth, for t'sake of saying
something that might turn her mother’s thoughts, now asked her if
Charlotte Lucas'd been at Longbourn since her coming away. That is my idea
of good breeding; those persons who fancy themselves very important, never
open their mouths, quite mistake t'matter.” 

 For my part, Bingley, I
always keep servants that can do their own work; my daughters are brought
up differently. I don't like t'boast of my own child, but t'be sure, Jane
--one doesn't often see anybody better looking. When she was only fifteen,
there was a man at my brother Gardiner’s in town so much in love with her
that my sister-in-law was sure he'd make her an offer before we came away.
But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that
one good sonnet will starve it entirely away.” Darcy only smiled;
t'general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother should
be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing
t'say; after a short silence Bennet began repeating her thanks t'Bingley
for his kindness to Jane, with an apology for troubling him also with
Lizzy. 

 T'two girls'd been whispering to each other during t'whole
visit, t'result of 'twas, that the youngest should tax Bingley with having
promised on his first coming int't'country t'give a ball at Netherfield.
Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and
good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection'd
brought her int'public at an early age. She'd high animal spirits, a sort
of natural self-consequence, which the attention of t'officers, t'whom her
uncle’s good dinners, her own easy manners recommended her,'d increased
int'assurance. 

 She was very equal, therefore, t'address Bingley on
t'subject of t'ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding,
that it'd be t'most shameful thing in t'world if he didn't keep it. 

 “I
am perfectly ready, I assure you, t'keep my engagement; when your sister
is recovered, you'll, if you please, name t'day of t'ball. yes--it'd be
much better to wait till Jane was well, by that time most likely Captain
Carter would be at Meryton again. 

 Bennet, her daughters then departed,
Elizabeth returned instantly t'Jane, leaving her own, her relations’
behaviour t'the remarks of t'two ladies, Darcy; t'latter of whom, however,
couldn't be prevailed on t'join in their censure of her, in spite of all
Bingley’s witticisms on fine eyes. 

 Hurst, Bingley'd spent some hours of
t'morning with t'invalid, who continued, though slowly, t'mend; in
t'evening Elizabeth joined their party in t'drawing-room. 

 Darcy was
writing, Bingley, seated near him, was watching t'progress of his letter,
repeatedly calling off his attention by messages t'his sister.
Elizabeth took up some needlework, was sufficiently amused in attending
t'what passed between Darcy, his companion. T'perpetual commendations of
t'lady, either on his handwriting,/on t'evenness of his lines,/on t'length
of his letter, with t'perfect unconcern with which her praises were
received, formed a curious dialogue, was exactly in union with her opinion
of each. 

 “Tell your sister I am delighted t'hear of her improvement on
t'harp; and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her
beautiful little design for a table, I think it infinitely superior t'
Grantley’s.” 

 “T'indirect boast; for you're really proud of your defects
in writing, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity of
thought, carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you think at
least highly interesting. 

 When you told Bennet this morning that if you
ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield you should be gone in five
minutes, you meant it t'be a sort of panegyric, of compliment t'yourself--
and yet what's there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave
necessary business undone, can be of no real advantage t'yourself/anyone
else?” 

 But I am afraid you're giving it a turn which that gentleman did
by no means intend; for he'd certainly think better of me, if under such a
circumstance I were t'give a flat denial, ride off as fast as I could.”
Allowing t'case to stand according t'your representation, you must
remember, Bennet, that t'friend who's supposed t'desire his return
t't'house, and t'delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it
without offering one argument in favour of its propriety.” 

 A regard for
t'requester would often make one readily yield t'a request, without
waiting for arguments t'reason one int'it. 

 “Will it not be advisable,
before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision
t'degree of importance which's to appertain t'this request, as well as
t'degree of intimacy subsisting between t'parties?” “By all means let us
hear all t'particulars, not forgetting their comparative height, size; for
that'll have more weight in t'argument, Bennet, than you may be aware of.
I assure you, that if Darcy weren't such a great tall fellow, in
comparison with myself, I shouldn't pay him half so much deference.
Bingley warmly resented t'indignity he'd received, in an expostulation
with her brother for talking such nonsense. Hurst sang with her sister,
while they were thus employed, Elizabeth couldn't help observing, as she
turned over some music-books that lay on t'instrument, how frequently
Darcy’s eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how t'suppose that she
could be an object of admiration t'so great a man; yet that he should look
at her because he disliked her, was still more strange. 

 She could only
imagine, however, at last that she drew hisn'tice because there was
something more wrong, reprehensible, according t'his ideas of right, than
in any other person present. After playing some Italian songs, Bingley
varied t'charm by a lively Scotch air; soon afterwards Darcy, drawing near
Elizabeth, said t'her: 

 “Don't you feel a great inclination, Bennet,
t'seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?” You wanted me, I know,
t'say ‘Yes,’ that you might've t'pleasure of despising my taste; but I
always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, cheating a person of
their premeditated contempt. 

 Elizabeth, having rather expected
t'affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a mixture of
sweetness, archness in her manner which made it difficult for her
t'affront anybody; Darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he
was by her. 

 Bingley saw,/suspected enough t'be jealous; her great
anxiety for t'recovery of her dear friend Jane received some assistance
from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth. 

 She often tried t'provoke
Darcy int'disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed marriage,
planning his happiness in such an alliance. “I hope,” said she, as they
were walking together in t'shrubbery t'next day, “you'll give your mother-
in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as
t't'advantage of holding her tongue; and if you can compass it, do cure
t'younger girls of running after officers. 

 And, if I may mention so
delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on
conceit, impertinence, which your lady possesses.” 

 They could describe
an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, laugh at
their acquaintance with spirit. But when t'gentlemen entered, Jane was no
longer t'first object; Bingley’s eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy,
she'd something t'say t'him before he'd advanced many steps. 

 He
addressed himself t'Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Hurst also made
her a slight bow, said he was “very glad;” but diffuseness and warmth
remained for Bingley’s salutation. She'd obtained private intelligence
that Darcy didn't wish for cards; Hurst soon found even his open petition
rejected. Darcy took up a book; Bingley did t'same; and Hurst, principally
occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now, then in her
brother’s conversation with Bennet. 

 Bingley’s attention was quite as
much engaged in watching Darcy’s progress through his book, as in reading
her own; she was perpetually either making some inquiry,/looking at his
page. At length, quite exhausted by t'attempt t'be amused with her own
book, which she'd only chosen because 'twas the second volume of his, she
gave a great yawn, said, “How pleasant 'tis t'spend an evening in this
way! 

 She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes
round t'room in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother
mentioning a ball t'Bennet, she turned suddenly towards him, said: 

 “If
you mean Darcy he may go t'bed, if he chooses, before it begins--but as
for t'ball, 'tis quite a settled thing; as soon as Nicholls has made white
soup enough, I'll send round my cards.” 

 “I should like balls infinitely
better if they were carried on in a different manner; but there's
something insufferably tedious in t'usual process of such a meeting. “Not
at all but depend upon it, he means t'be severe on us, our surest way of
disappointing him will be t'ask nothing about it.” 

 Bingley was
incapable of disappointing Darcy in anything, persevered therefore in
requiring an explanation of his two motives. “You either choose this
method of passing t'evening because you're in each other’s confidence,
have secret affairs t'discuss,/because you're conscious that your figures
appear t't'greatest advantage in walking; if t'first, I'd be completely in
your way, if t'second, I can admire you much better as I sit by t'fire.”
T'wisest, t'best of men--nay, t'wisest, best of their actions--may be
rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life is a joke.”
Follies, nonsense, whims, inconsistencies, do divert me, I own, and I
laugh at them whenever I can. “There's, I believe, in every disposition a
tendency t'some particular evil--a natural defect, which not even t'best
education can overcome.” 

 “Do let us have a little music,” cried
Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she'd no share. But Bennet,
who'd calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till
t'following Tuesday, which would exactly finish Jane’s week, couldn't
bring herself t'receive them with pleasure before. 

 Bennet sent them
word that they couldn't possibly have t'carriage before Tuesday; in her
postscript 'twas added, that if Bingley and his sister pressed them t'stay
longer, she could spare them very well. Against staying longer Elizabeth
was positively resolved--nor did she much expect it'd be asked; fearful,
on the contrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly
long, she urged Jane t'borrow Bingley’s carriage immediately, at length
'twas settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that
morning should be mentioned, t'request made. T'master of t'house heard
with real sorrow that they were t'go so soon, repeatedly tried t'persuade
Bennet that it'd not be safe for her--that she wasn't enough recovered;
but Jane was firm where she felt herself t'be right. 

 He wisely resolved
t'be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape
him, nothing that could elevate her with t'hope of influencing his
felicity; sensible that if such an idea'd been suggested, his behaviour
during t'last day must've material weight in confirming/crushing it.
Steady t'his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words t'her through t'whole of
Saturday, though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-
hour, he adhered most conscientiously t'his book, wouldn't even look at
her. Bingley’s civility t'Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as
well as her affection for Jane; when they parted, after assuring t'latter
of t'pleasure it'd always give her t'see her either at
Longbourn/Netherfield, embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands
with t'former. Bennet wondered at their coming, thought them wrong t'give
so much trouble, was sure Jane'd've caught cold again. 

 But their
father, though laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad
t'see them; he'd felt their importance in t'family circle. The evening
conversation, when they were all assembled,'d lost much of its animation,
almost all its sense by t'absence of Jane and Elizabeth. They found Mary,
as usual, deep in t'study of thorough-bass, human nature;'d some extracts
t'admire, some new observations of threadbare morality t'listen to.
Much'd been done, much'd been said in t'regiment since t'preceding
Wednesday; several of t'officers had dined lately with their uncle, a
private'd been flogged, it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster
was gonna be married. 

 “I hope, my dear,” said Bennet t'his wife, as
they were at breakfast t'next morning, “that you've ordered a good dinner
to-day, because I've reason t'expect an addition t'our family party.” 

 I
know of nobody that's coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas should
happen t'call in--and I hope my dinners are good enough for her. 

 I do
think 'tis t'hardest thing in t'world, that your estate should be entailed
away from your own children; I am sure, if I'd been you, I should've tried
long ago t'do something/other about it.” They had often attempted t'do it
before, but 'twas a subject on which Bennet was beyond t'reach of reason,
she continued t'rail bitterly against t'cruelty of settling an estate away
from a family of five daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared
anything about. 

 “T'disagreement subsisting between yourself, my late
honoured father always gave me much uneasiness, since I've'd the
misfortune t'lose him, I've frequently wished t'heal t'breach; but for
some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem
disrespectful t'his memory for me t'be on good terms with anyone with whom
it'd always pleased him t'be at variance.--‘There, Bennet.’--My mind is
now made up on t'subject, for having received ordination at Easter, I've
been so fortunate as t'be distinguished by t'patronage of t'Right ourable
Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty, beneficence
has preferred me t't'valuable rectory of this parish, where it'll be my
earnest endeavour t'demean myself with grateful respect towards her
ladyship, be ever ready t'perform those rites, ceremonies which are
instituted by t'Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, I feel it my
duty t'promote, establish t'blessing of peace in all families within
t'reach of my influence; on these grounds I flatter myself that my present
overtures are highly commendable, and that t'circumstance of my being next
in t'entail of Longbourn estate will be kindly overlooked on your side,
not lead you t'reject the offered olive-branch. 

 I cannot be otherwise
than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, beg
leave t'apologise for it, as well as t'assure you of my readiness t'make
them every possible amends--but of this hereafter. If you should've no
objection to receive me int'your house, I propose myself t'satisfaction of
waiting on you, your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o’clock, and
shall probably trespass on your hospitality till t'Saturday se’ennight
following, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Catherine is far
from objecting t'my occasional absence on a Sunday, provided that some
other clergyman is engaged t'do t'duty of t'day.--I remain, dear sir, with
respectful compliments t'your lady and daughters, your well-wisher,
friend, “He seems t'be a most conscientious, polite young man, upon my
word, I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if
Catherine should be so indulgent as t'let him come t'us again.” Elizabeth
was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Catherine, his kind
intention of christening, marrying, burying his parishioners whenever it
were required. 

 “He must be an oddity, I think I cannot make him out.--
There's something pompous in his style.--And what can he mean by
apologising for being next in t'entail?--We cannot suppose he would help
it if he could.--Could he be a sensible man, sir?” 'twas next t'impossible
that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, 'twas now some weeks
since they'd received pleasure from t'society of a man in any other
colour. 

 As for their mother, Collins’s letter'd done away much of her
ill-will, and she was preparing t'see him with a degree of composure which
astonished her husband, daughters. He'dn't been long seated before he
complimented Bennet on having so fine a family of daughters; said he'd
heard much of their beauty, but that in this instance fame'd fallen short
of t'truth; added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time
disposed of in marriage. “I am sensible, madam, of t'hardship t'my fair
cousins, and could say much on t'subject, but that I am cautious of
appearing forward, precipitate. 

 The hall, t'dining-room, all its
furniture, were examined, praised; and his commendation of everything'd've
touched Bennet’s heart, but for t'mortifying supposition of his viewing it
all as his own future property. 

 T'dinner too in its turn was highly
admired; and he begged t'know t'which of his fair cousins t'excellency of
its cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Bennet, who assured
him with some asperity that they were well able t'keep a good cook, that
her daughters hadn'thing t'do in t'kitchen. During dinner, Bennet scarcely
spoke at all; but when t'servants were withdrawn, he thought it time
t'have some conversation with his guest, therefore started a subject in
which he expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed fortunate in
his patroness. 

 Catherine de Bourgh’s attention t'his wishes,
consideration for his comfort, appeared remarkable. T'subject elevated him
t'more than usual solemnity of manner, with a most important aspect he
protested that “he'd never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a
person of rank--such affability, condescension, as he'd himself
experienced from Catherine. She'd always spoken t'him as she'd t'any other
gentleman; she made not t'smallest objection t'his joining in t'society of
the neighbourhood nor t'his leaving t'parish occasionally for a week or
two, t'visit his relations. “T'garden in which stands my humble abode is
separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her ladyship’s residence.”
Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty, de Bourgh is far
superior t'the handsomest of her sex, because there's that in her features
which marks t'young lady of distinguished birth. 

 She's unfortunately of
a sickly constitution, which's prevented her from making that progress in
many accomplishments which she couldn't have otherwise failed of, as I am
informed by t'lady who superintended her education, who still resides with
them. 

 But she's perfectly amiable, often condescends t'drive by my
humble abode in her little phaeton, ponies.” “Her indifferent state of
health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as I told
Catherine one day, has deprived the British court of its brightest
ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleased with t'idea; you may imagine that I
am happy on every occasion to offer those little delicate compliments
which are always acceptable t'ladies. I've more than once observed
t'Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born t'be a duchess, that
t'most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned
by her. These're t'kind of little things which please her ladyship, and
'tis a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound to pay.”
“They arise chiefly from what's passing at t'time, though I sometimes
amuse myself with suggesting, arranging such little elegant compliments as
may be adapted t'ordinary occasions, I always wish to give them as
unstudied an air as possible.” His cousin was as absurd as he'd hoped, he
listened t'him with t'keenest enjoyment, maintaining at t'same time t'most
resolute composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at
Elizabeth, requiring no partner in his pleasure. 

 Collins readily
assented, a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything
announced it t'be from a circulating library), he started back, and
begging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Lydia gaped as he
opened the volume, before he'd, with monotonous solemnity, read three
pages, she interrupted him with: “Do you know, mamma, that my uncle
Phillips talks of turning away Richard; if he does, Colonel Forster will
hire him. Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters t'hold her tongue; but
Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, said: “I've often observed
how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though
written solely for their benefit. Bennet accepted t'challenge, observing
that he acted very wisely in leaving t'girls t'their own trifling
amusements. Bennet, her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia’s
interruption, promised that it shouldn't occur again, if he'd resume his
book; but Collins, after assuring them that he bore his young cousin no
ill-will, should never resent her behaviour as any affront, seated himself
at another table with Bennet, prepared for backgammon. 

 Collins wasn't a
sensible man, t'deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by
education/society; t'greatest part of his life having been spent under
t'guidance of an illiterate and miserly father; though he belonged t'one
of t'universities, he had merely kept t'necessary terms, without forming
at it any useful acquaintance. T'subjection in which his father'd brought
him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but 'twas now a
good deal counteracted by t'self-conceit of a weak head, living in
retirement, t'consequential feelings of early, unexpected prosperity. 

 A
fortunate chance'd recommended him t'Catherine de Bourgh when t'living of
Hunsford was vacant; t'respect which he felt for her high rank, his
veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a good opinion of
himself, of his authority as a clergyman, his right as a rector, made him
altogether a mixture of pride, obsequiousness, self-importance, humility.
Having now a good house, a sufficient income, he intended to marry; in
seeking a reconciliation with t'Longbourn family he'd a wife in view, as
he meant t'choose one of t'daughters, if he found them as handsome,
amiable as they were represented by common report. 

 This was his plan of
amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father’s estate; he thought it
an excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, excessively
generous, disinterested on his own part. Bennet’s lovely face confirmed
his views, established all his strictest notions of what was due
t'seniority; for t'first evening she was his settled choice. 

 T'next
morning made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour’s tete-a-tete with
Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-
house, leading naturally t't'avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be
found for it at Longbourn, produced from her, amid complaisant smiles,
general encouragement, a caution against t'Jane he'd fixed on. Bennet
treasured up t'hint, trusted that she might soon have two daughters
married; t'man whom she couldn't bear t'speak of t'day before was now high
in her good graces. Lydia’s intention of walking t'Meryton wasn't
forgotten; every sister except Mary agreed t'go with her; Collins was
t'attend them, at t'request of Bennet, who was most anxious t'get rid of
him, and have his library t'himself; for thither Collins'd followed him
after breakfast; there he'd continue, nominally engaged with one of
t'largest folios in t'collection, but really talking t' Bennet, with
little cessation, of his house, garden at Hunsford. In his library he'd
been always sure of leisure, tranquillity; though prepared, as he told
Elizabeth, t'meet with folly, conceit in every other room of the house, he
was used t'be free from them there; his civility, therefore, was most
prompt in inviting Collins t'join his daughters in their walk; Collins,
being in fact much better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely
pleased t'close his large book, go. In pompous nothings on his side, civil
assents on that of his cousins, their time passed till they entered
Meryton. Their eyes were immediately wandering up in t'street in quest of
t'officers, and nothing less than a smart bonnet ,/a really new muslin in
a shop window, could recall them. But t'attention of every lady was soon
caught by a young man, whom they'd never seen before, of most
gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another officer on t'other side of
t'way. 

 All were struck with the stranger’s air, all wondered who he
could be; Kitty, Lydia, determined if possible t'find out, led t'way
across t'street, under pretense of wanting something in an opposite shop,
fortunately had just gained t'pavement when t'two gentlemen, turning back,
had reached t'same spot. 

 Denny addressed them directly, entreated
permission t'introduce his friend, Wickham, who'd returned with him t'day
before from town, he was happy t'say'd accepted a commission in their
corps. 

 His appearance was greatly in his favour; he'd all t'best part
of beauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, pleasing address.
T'introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readiness of
conversation--a readiness at t'same time perfectly correct and unassuming;
t'whole party were still standing, talking together very agreeably, when
t'sound of horses drew their notice, Darcy and Bingley were seen riding
down t'street. 

 Denny, Wickham walked with t'young ladies t't'door of
Phillip’s house, then made their bows, in spite of Lydia’s pressing
entreaties that they should come in, even in spite of Phillips’s throwing
up t'parlour window, loudly seconding the invitation. Phillips was always
glad t'see her nieces; t'two eldest, from their recent absence, were
particularly welcome, she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their
sudden return home, which, as their own carriage hadn't fetched them, she
should've known nothing about, if she'dn't happened t'see Jones’s shop-boy
in the street, who'd told her that they weren't t'send any more draughts
to Netherfield because t'Bennets were come away, when her civility was
claimed towards Collins by Jane’s introduction of him. She received him
with her best politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologising
for his intrusion, without any previous acquaintance with her, which he
couldn't help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his
relationship t't'young ladies who introduced him t'her notice. Phillips
was quite awed by such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation
of one stranger was soon put t'an end by exclamations, inquiries about
t'other; of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what they
already knew, that Denny'd brought him from London, that he was t'have a
lieutenant’s commission in t'----shire. 

 She'd been watching him the
last hour, she said, as he walked up, down t'street,'d Wickham appeared,
Kitty, Lydia would certainly have continued the occupation, but unluckily
no one passed windows now except a few of the officers, who, in comparison
with t'stranger, were become “stupid, disagreeable fellows.” Some of them
were t'dine with t'Phillipses t'next day, their aunt promised t'make her
husband call on Wickham, give him an invitation also, if t'family from
Longbourn would come in t'evening. This was agreed to, Phillips protested
that they'd've a nice comfortable noisy game of lottery tickets, a little
bit of hot supper afterwards. 

 Collins repeated his apologies in
quitting t'room, was assured with unwearying civility that they were
perfectly needless. As they walked home, Elizabeth related t'Jane what
she'd seen pass between t'two gentlemen; but though Jane'd've defended
either or both,'d they appeared t'be in t'wrong, she could no more explain
such behaviour than her sister. Collins on his return highly gratified
Bennet by admiring Phillips’s manners, politeness. As no objection was
made t't'young people’s engagement with their aunt, all Collins’s scruples
of leaving , Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most
steadily resisted, t'coach conveyed him, his five cousins at a suitable
hour t'Meryton; and t'girls'd t'pleasure of hearing, as they entered
t'drawing-room, that Wickham'd accepted their uncle’s invitation, was then
in t'house. 

 When this information was given, they'd all taken their
seats, Collins was at leisure t'look around him, admire, he was so much
struck with t'size, furniture of t'apartment, that he declared he might
almost have supposed himself in t'small summer breakfast parlour at
Rosings; a comparison that didn't at first convey much gratification; but
when Phillips understood from him what Rosings was, who was its proprietor
--when she'd listened t'the description of only one of Catherine’s
drawing-rooms, found that t'chimney-piece alone'd cost eight hundred
pounds, she felt all t'force of t'compliment, would hardly have resented a
comparison with t'housekeeper’s room. 

 In describing t'her all
t'grandeur of Catherine, her mansion, with occasional digressions in
praise of his own humble abode, and t'improvements 'twas receiving, he was
happily employed until the gentlemen joined them; he found in Phillips a
attentive listener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what
she heard, who was resolving t'retail it all among her neighbours as soon
as she could. T't'girls, who couldn't listen t'their cousin, and
who'dn'thing t'do but t'wish for an instrument, examine their own
indifferent imitations of china on t'mantelpiece, the interval of waiting
appeared long. T'gentlemen did approach, when Wickham walked int't'room,
Elizabeth felt that she'd neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of
him since, with t'smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.
T'officers of t'----shire were in general a creditable, gentlemanlike set,
t'best of them were of t'present party; but Wickham was as far beyond them
all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior
t't'broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips, breathing port wine, who followed
them int't'room. Wickham was t'happy man towards whom almost every female
eye was turned, Elizabeth was t'happy woman by whom he finally seated
himself; t'agreeable manner in which he immediately fell into
conversation, though 'twas only on its being a wet night, made her feel
that t'commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered
interesting by t'skill of t'speaker. With such rivals for t'notice of
t'fair as Wickham, the officers, Collins seemed t'sink int'insignificance;
t't'young ladies he certainly wasn'thing; but he'd still at intervals a
kind listener in Phillips, was by her watchfulness, most abundantly
supplied with coffee, muffin. Wickham didn't play at whist, with ready
delight was he received at t'other table between Elizabeth, Lydia. At
first there seemed danger of Lydia’s engrossing him entirely, for she was
a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery
tickets, she soon grew too much interested in t'game, too eager in making
bets and exclaiming after prizes t'have attention for anyone in
particular. 

 Allowing for t'common demands of t'game, Wickham was
therefore at leisure t'talk t'Elizabeth, she was willing t'hear him,
though what she chiefly wished t'hear she couldn't hope t'be told--
t'history of his acquaintance with Darcy. He inquired how far Netherfield
was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating
manner how long Darcy'd been staying there. “About a month,” said
Elizabeth; then, unwilling t'let t'subject drop, added, “He's a man of
large property in Derbyshire, I understand.” You couldn't have met with a
person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than
myself, for I've been connected with his family in a particular manner
from my infancy.” 

 “You may well be surprised, Bennet, at such an
assertion, after seeing, as you probably might, t'cold manner of our
meeting yesterday. “I cannot pretend t'be sorry,” said Wickham, after a
short interruption, “that he/that any man shouldn't be estimated beyond
their deserts; but with him I believe it doesn't often happen. The world
is blinded by his fortune, consequence,/frightened by his high, imposing
manners, sees him only as he chooses t'be seen.” His behaviour t'myself
has been scandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything and
everything, rather than his disappointing t'hopes, disgracing the memory
of his father.” 

 Wickham began t'speak on more general topics, Meryton,
the neighbourhood, t'society, appearing highly pleased with all that he'd
yet seen, speaking of t'latter with gentle but very intelligible
gallantry. I knew it t'be a most respectable, agreeable corps, my friend
Denny tempted me further by his account of their present quarters, t'great
attentions, excellent acquaintances Meryton'd procured them. 

 T'church
ought t'have been my profession--I was brought up for t'church, I should
at this time have been in possession of a most valuable living,'d it
pleased t'gentleman we were speaking of just now.” A man of honour
couldn't have doubted the intention, but Darcy chose t'doubt it--or
t'treat it as a merely conditional recommendation, t'assert that I'd
forfeited all claim t'it by extravagance, imprudence--in short
anything/nothing. 

 Had t'late Darcy liked me less, his son might've
borne with me better; but his father’s uncommon attachment t'me irritated
him, I believe, early in life. I'd supposed him t'be despising his fellow-
creatures in general, but didn't suspect him of descending t'such
malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity as this.” 

 After a
few minutes’ reflection she continued, “I do remember his boasting one
day, at Netherfield, of t'implacability of his resentments, of his having
an unforgiving temper. Elizabeth was again deep in thought, after a time
exclaimed, “To treat in such a manner t'godson, t'friend, t'favourite of
his father!A young man, too, like you, whose very countenance may vouch
for your being amiable”--but she contented herself with, “and one, too,
who'd probably been his companion from childhood, connected together, as I
think you said, in t'closest manner!” 

 “We were born in t'same parish,
within t'same park; t'greatest part of our youth was passed together;
inmates of t'same house, sharing t'same amusements, objects of t'same
parental care. 

 My father began life in t'profession which your uncle,
Phillips, appears t'do so much credit to--but he gave up everything t'be
of use t't'late Darcy, devoted all his time t't'care of the Pemberley
property. Darcy often acknowledged himself to be under t'greatest
obligations t'my father’s active superintendence, and when, immediately
before my father’s death, Darcy gave him a voluntary promise of providing
for me, I am convinced that he felt it to be as much a debt of gratitude
t'him, as of his affection t'myself.” It's often led him t'be liberal,
generous, t'give his money freely, t'display hospitality, t'assist his
tenants, relieve the poor. 

 Since her father’s death, her home has been
London, where a lady lives with her, superintends her education.” His
pride never deserts him; but with t'rich he's liberal-minded, just,
sincere, rational, honourable, perhaps agreeable--allowing something for
fortune, figure.” 

 T'whist party soon afterwards breaking up, t'players
gathered round t'other table, Collins took his station between his cousin
Elizabeth, Phillips. It hadn't been great; he'd lost every point; but when
Phillips began t'express her concern thereupon, he assured her with much
earnest gravity that 'twasn't of t'least importance, that he considered
t'money as a mere trifle, begged that she'd not make herself uneasy. 

 “I
know well, madam that when persons sit down t'a card-table, they must take
their chances of these things, happily I ain't in such circumstances as
t'make five shillings any object. There are undoubtedly many who couldn't
say t'same, but thanks t' Catherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond
t'necessity of regarding little matters.” 

 Wickham’s attention was
caught; after observing Collins for a few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a
low voice whether her relation was intimately acquainted with t'family of
de Bourgh. 

 “Collins speaks highly both of Catherine, her daughter; but
from some particulars that he's related of her ladyship, I suspect his
gratitude misleads him, that in spite of her being his patroness, she's an
arrogant, conceited woman.” “I believe her t'be both in a great degree
I've not seen her for many years, but I well remember that I never liked
her, that her manners were dictatorial, insolent. 

 Elizabeth allowed
that he'd given a rational account of it, and they continued talking
together, with mutual satisfaction till supper put an end t'cards, gave
t'rest of t'ladies their share of Wickham’s attentions. She could think of
nothing but of Wickham, of what he'd told her, all t'way home; but there
wasn't time for her even t'mention his name as they went, for neither
Lydia nor Collins were once silent. 

 Lydia talked incessantly of lottery
tickets, of t'fish she'd lost, the fish she'd won; Collins in describing
t'civility of and Phillips, protesting that he didn't in t'least regard
his losses at whist, enumerating all t'dishes at supper, repeatedly
fearing that he crowded his cousins,'d more t'say than he could well
manage before t'carriage stopped at Longbourn House. 

 Jane listened with
astonishment, concern; she knew not how t'believe that Darcy could be so
unworthy of Bingley’s regard; yet, 'twasn't in her nature t'question the
veracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. The
possibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough to interest
all her tender feelings; nothing remained therefore t'be done, but t'think
well of them both, t'defend t'conduct of each, and throw int't'account of
accident/mistake whatever couldn't be otherwise explained. “Very true, ;
now, my dear Jane, what've you gotta say on behalf of t'interested people
who've probably been concerned in the business? “I can much more easily
believe Bingley’s being imposed on, than that Wickham should invent such a
history of himself as he gave me last night; names, facts, everything
mentioned without ceremony. T'two young ladies were summoned from
t'shrubbery, where this conversation passed, by t'arrival of t'persons of
whom they'd been speaking; Bingley, his sisters came t'give their personal
invitation for t'long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixed for
t'following Tuesday. 

 T'two ladies were delighted t'see their dear
friend again, called it an age since they'd met, repeatedly asked what
she'd been doing with herself since their separation. 

 They were soon
gone again, rising from their seats with an activity which took their
brother by surprise, hurrying off as if eager t'escape from Bennet’s
civilities. Bennet chose t'consider it as given in compliment t'her eldest
daughter, was particularly flattered by receiving t'invitation from
Bingley himself, instead of a ceremonious card. 

 Jane pictured t'herself
a happy evening in the society of her two friends, t'attentions of their
brother; and Elizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with
Wickham, of seeing a confirmation of everything in Darcy’s look and
behaviour. 

 Society has claims on us all; I profess myself one of those
who consider intervals of recreation, amusement as desirable for
everybody.” Elizabeth’s spirits were so high on this occasion, that though
she did not often speak unnecessarily t'Collins, she couldn't help asking
him whether he intended t'accept Bingley’s invitation, if he did, whether
he'd think it proper t'join in t'evening’s amusement; she was rather
surprised t'find that he entertained no scruple whatever on that head, was
far from dreading a rebuke either from t',/Catherine de Bourgh, by
venturing to dance. “I am by no means of t'opinion, I assure you that a
ball of this kind, given by a young man of character, t'respectable
people, can have any evil tendency; I am so far from objecting t'dancing
myself, that I'll hope t'be honoured with t'hands of all my fair cousins
in t'course of t'evening; I take this opportunity of soliciting yours,
Elizabeth, for t'two first dances especially, a preference which I trust
my cousin Jane will attribute t't'right cause, not t'any disrespect for
her.” 

 Wickham’s happiness, her own were perforce delayed a little
longer, Collins’s proposal accepted with as good a grace as she could. It
now first struck her, that she was selected from among her sisters as
worthy of being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, of assisting t'form a
quadrille table at Rosings, in t'absence of more eligible visitors.
T'idea soon reached t'conviction, as she observed his increasing
civilities toward herself, heard his frequent attempt at a compliment on
her wit, vivacity; though more astonished than gratified herself by this
effect of her charms, 'twasn't long before her mother gave her
t'understand that t'probability of their marriage was extremely agreeable
t'her. If there'dn't been a Netherfield ball t'prepare for, talk of, the
younger Bennets'd've been in a pitiable state at this time, for from t'day
of t'invitation, t't'day of t'ball, there was such a succession of rain as
prevented their walking t'Meryton once. Even Elizabeth might've found some
trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended the improvement
of her acquaintance with Wickham; nothing less than a dance on Tuesday,
could've made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday endurable
t'Kitty, Lydia. 

 Till Elizabeth entered t'drawing-room at Netherfield,
looked in vain for Wickham among t'cluster of red coats there assembled, a
doubt of his being present'd never occurred t'her. She'd dressed with more
than usual care, prepared in t'highest spirits for t'conquest of all that
remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that 'twasn't more than might be
won in t'course of t'evening. But in an instant arose t'dreadful suspicion
of his being purposely omitted for Darcy’s pleasure in t'Bingleys’
invitation t't'officers; though this wasn't exactly t'case, t'absolute
fact of his absence was pronounced by his friend Denny, t'whom Lydia
eagerly applied, who told them that Wickham'd been obliged t'go t'town on
business the day before, wasn't yet returned; adding, with a significant
smile, “I don't imagine his business'd've called him away just now, if
he'dn't wanted t'avoid a certain gentleman here.” 

 This part of his
intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught by Elizabeth, and, as it
assured her that Darcy wasn't less answerable for Wickham’s absence than
if her first surmise'd been just, every feeling of displeasure against
t'former was so sharpened by immediate disappointment, that she could
hardly reply with tolerable civility to t'polite inquiries which he
directly afterwards approached t'make. 

 She was resolved against any
sort of conversation with him, turned away with a degree of ill-humour
which she couldn't wholly surmount even in speaking t'Bingley, whose blind
partiality provoked her. 

 But Elizabeth wasn't formed for ill-humour;
though every prospect of her own was destroyed for t'evening, it couldn't
dwell long on her spirits; having told all her griefs t'Charlotte Lucas,
whom she'd not seen for a week, she was soon able t'make a voluntary
transition t't'oddities of her cousin, t'point him out t'her particular
notice. Collins, awkward, solemn, apologising instead of attending, often
moving wrong without being aware of it, gave her all t'shame, misery which
a disagreeable partner for a couple of dances can give. When those dances
were over, she returned t'Charlotte Lucas, was in conversation with her,
when she found herself suddenly addressed by Darcy who took her so much by
surprise in his application for her hand, that, without knowing what she
did, she accepted him. 

 He walked away again immediately, she was left
t'fret over her own want of presence of mind; Charlotte tried t'console
her: When t'dancing recommenced Darcy approached t'claim her hand,
Charlotte couldn't help cautioning her in a whisper, not t'be a simpleton,
allow her fancy for Wickham t'make her appear unpleasant in t'eyes of a
man ten times his consequence. They stood for some time without speaking a
word; she began to imagine that their silence was t'last through t'two
dances, at first was resolved not t'break it; till suddenly fancying that
it'd be t'greater punishment t'her partner t'oblige him t'talk, she made
some slight observation on t'dance. 

 It'd look odd t'be entirely silent
for half an hour together; yet for t'advantage of some, conversation ought
t'be so arranged, as that they may've the trouble of saying as little as
possible.” 

 We're each of an unsocial, taciturn disposition, unwilling
t'speak, unless we expect t'say something that'll amaze t'whole room, be
handed down to posterity with all t'eclat of a proverb.” He made no
answer, they were again silent till they'd gone down t'dance, when he
asked her if she, her sisters didn't often walk t'Meryton. 

 She answered
in t'affirmative, and, unable t'resist t'temptation, added, “When you met
us there t'other day, we'd just been forming a new acquaintance.” 

 A
deeper shade of hauteur overspread his features, but he said not a word,
Elizabeth, though blaming herself for her own weakness, couldn't go on.
At that moment, William Lucas appeared close t'them, meaning t'pass
through t'set t't'other side of t'room; but on perceiving Darcy, he
stopped with a bow of superior courtesy t'compliment him on his dancing,
his partner. 

 Allow me t'say that your fair partner doesn't disgrace
you, that I must hope t'have this pleasure often repeated, especially when
a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing at her sister, Bingley)
shall take place. You won't thank me for detaining you from t'bewitching
converse of that young lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me.”
T'latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but William’s
allusion t'his friend seemed t'strike him forcibly, his eyes were directed
with a serious expression towards Bingley and Jane, who were dancing
together. 

 Recovering himself shortly, he turned t'his partner, said,
“William’s interruption has made me forget what we were talking of.” “Yes,
always,” she replied, without knowing what she said, for her thoughts'd
wandered far from t'subject, as soon afterwards appeared by her suddenly
exclaiming, “I remember hearing you once say, Darcy, that you hardly ever
forgave, that your resentment once created was unappeasable. 

 “I can
readily believe that reports may vary greatly with respect t'me; I could
wish, Bennet, that you were not t'sketch my character at t'present moment,
as there's reason to fear that t'performance would reflect no credit on
either.” 

 She said no more, they went down t'other dance, parted in
silence; on each side dissatisfied, though not t'an equal degree, for in
Darcy’s breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towards her, which
soon procured her pardon, directed all his anger against another. Your
sister has been talking t'me about him, asking me a thousand questions; I
find that t'young man quite forgotta tell you, among his other
communication, that he was t'son of old Wickham, t'late Darcy’s steward.
Let me recommend you as a friend, not to give implicit confidence t'all
his assertions; for as t'Darcy’s using him ill, 'tis perfectly false; for,
on t'contrary, he's always been remarkably kind t'him, though George
Wickham has treated Darcy in a most infamous manner. I pity you, Eliza,
for this discovery of your favourite’s guilt; but really, considering his
descent, one couldn't expect much better.” “His guilt, his descent appear
by your account t'be t'same,” said Elizabeth angrily; “for I've heard you
accuse him of nothing worse than of being t'son of Darcy’s steward, of
that, I can assure you, he informed me himself.” 

 I see nothing in it
but your own wilful ignorance, t'malice of Darcy.” She then sought her
eldest sister, who'd undertaken t'make inquiries on t'same subject of
Bingley. Jane met her with a smile of such sweet complacency, a glow of
such happy expression, as sufficiently marked how well she was satisfied
with t'occurrences of t'evening. Bingley doesn't know t'whole of his
history, is quite ignorant of t'circumstances which have principally
offended Darcy; but he'll vouch for t'good conduct, t'probity, honour of
his friend, is perfectly convinced that Wickham has deserved much less
attention from Darcy than he's received; I am sorry t'say by his account
as well as his sister’s, Wickham is by no means a respectable young man.
“I'ven't a doubt of Bingley’s sincerity,” said Elizabeth warmly; “but you
must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. 

 Elizabeth
listened with delight t't'happy, though modest hopes which Jane
entertained of Bingley’s regard, said all in her power t'heighten her
confidence in it. 

 On their being joined by Bingley himself, Elizabeth
withdrew t'Lucas; t'whose inquiry after t'pleasantness of her last partner
she'd scarcely replied, before Collins came up t'them, and told her with
great exultation that he'd just been so fortunate as t'make a most
important discovery. 

 I happened t'overhear the gentleman himself
mentioning t't'young lady who's t'honours of t'house t'names of his cousin
de Bourgh, of her mother Catherine. I am most thankful that t'discovery is
made in time for me t'pay my respects t'him, which I am now gonna do,
trust he'll excuse my not having done it before. Elizabeth tried hard
t'dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring him that Darcy would consider
his addressing him without introduction as an impertinent freedom, rather
than a compliment t'his aunt; that 'twasn't in t'least necessary there
should be any notice on either side; that if it were, it must belong
t'Darcy, t'superior in consequence, t'begin t'acquaintance. Collins
listened t'her with t'determined air of following his own inclination,
and, when she ceased speaking, replied thus: “My dear Elizabeth, I've
t'highest opinion in t'world in your excellent judgement in all matters
within t'scope of your understanding; but permit me t'say, that there must
be a wide difference between t'established forms of ceremony amongst
t'laity, and those which regulate t'clergy; for, give me leave t'observe
that I consider t'clerical office as equal in point of dignity with
t'highest rank in t'kingdom--provided that a proper humility of behaviour
is at t'same time maintained. You must therefore allow me to follow
t'dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me to perform
what I look on as a point of duty. 

 Pardon me for neglecting to profit
by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constant guide,
though in t'case before us I consider myself more fitted by education,
habitual study t'decide on what's right than a young lady like yourself.”
And with a low bow he left her t'attack Darcy, whose reception of his
advances she eagerly watched, whose astonishment at being so addressed was
evident. Darcy was eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, when at last
Collins allowed him time t'speak, replied with an air of distant civility.
Collins, however, wasn't discouraged from speaking again, Darcy’s contempt
seemed abundantly increasing with t'length of his second speech, at the
end of it he only made him a slight bow, moved another way. He answered me
with t'utmost civility, even paid me t'compliment of saying that he was so
well convinced of Catherine’s discernment as t'be certain she could never
bestow a favour unworthily. 

 As Elizabeth'd no longer any interest of
her own t'pursue, she turned her attention almost entirely on her sister,
Bingley; the train of agreeable reflections which her observations gave
birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. 

 She saw her in idea
settled in that house, in all t'felicity which a marriage of true
affection could bestow; she felt capable, under such circumstances, of
endeavouring even t'like Bingley’s two sisters. 

 Her mother’s thoughts
she plainly saw were bent t'same way, she determined not to venture near
her, lest she might hear too much. 

 When they sat down to supper,
therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness which placed them
within one of each other; deeply was she vexed t'find that her mother was
talking t'that one person (Lucas) freely, openly, of nothing else but her
expectation that Jane would soon be married t'Bingley. 

 His being such a
charming young man, so rich, living but three miles from them, were
t'first points of self-gratulation; and then 'twas such a comfort t'think
how fond t'two sisters were of Jane, t'be certain that they must desire
t'connection as much as she could do. 'twas necessary t'make this
circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions 'tis
t'etiquette; but no one was less likely than Bennet t'find comfort in
staying home at any period of her life. She concluded with many good
wishes that Lucas might soon be equally fortunate, though evidently,
triumphantly believing there was no chance of it. 

 In vain did Elizabeth
endeavour t'check t'rapidity of her mother’s words,/persuade her
t'describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, t'her
inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that the chief of 'twas
overheard by Darcy, who sat opposite t'them. 

 At length Bennet'd no more
t'say; Lucas, who had been long yawning at t'repetition of delights which
she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left t't'comforts of cold ham and
chicken. But not long was t'interval of tranquillity; for, when supper was
over, singing was talked of, and she'd t'mortification of seeing Mary,
after little entreaty, preparing t'oblige t'company. By many significant
looks, silent entreaties, did she endeavour t'prevent such a proof of
complaisance, but in vain; Mary wouldn't understand them; such an
opportunity of exhibiting was delightful t'her, she began her song.
Elizabeth’s eyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, she
watched her progress through t'several stanzas with an impatience which
was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst
t'thanks of t'table, t'hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to
favour them again, after t'pause of half a minute began another. 

 Mary’s
powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice was weak, her
manner affected. She looked at his two sisters, saw them making signs of
derision at each other, at Darcy, who continued, however, imperturbably
grave. 

 He took t'hint, and when Mary'd finished her second song, said
aloud, “That'll do extremely well, child. Mary, though pretending not
t'hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, sorry for
her father’s speech, was afraid her anxiety'd done no good. 

 “If I were
so fortunate as t'be able t'sing, I should've great pleasure, I am sure,
in obliging t'company with an air; for I consider music as a innocent
diversion, perfectly compatible with t'profession of a clergyman. He must
write his own sermons; t'time that remains won't be too much for his
parish duties, t'care and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be
excused from making as comfortable as possible. 

 And I don't think it of
light importance that he should've attentive, conciliatory manners towards
everybody, especially towards those t'whom he owes his preferment. 

 I
cannot acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of t'man who should
omit an occasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with
the family.” And with a bow t'Darcy, he concluded his speech, which had
been spoken so loud as t'be heard by half t'room. Many stared--many
smiled; but no one looked more amused than Bennet himself, while his wife
seriously commended Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in
a half-whisper t'Lucas, that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of
young man. T'Elizabeth it appeared that,'d her family made an agreement to
expose themselves as much as they could during t'evening, it'd have been
impossible for them t'play their parts with more spirit or finer success;
happy did she think it for Bingley, her sister that some of t'exhibition'd
escaped hisn'tice, that his feelings weren't of a sort t'be much
distressed by t'folly which he must've witnessed. 

 That his two sisters,
Darcy should have such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad
enough, and she couldn't determine whether t'silent contempt of the
gentleman,/t'insolent smiles of t'ladies, were more intolerable. She was
teased by Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, though he
couldn't prevail on her t'dance with him again, put it out of her power
t'dance with others. 

 He assured her, that as t'dancing, he was
perfectly indifferent t'it; that his chief object was by delicate
attentions t'recommend himself to her, that he should therefore make a
point of remaining close t'her t'whole evening. She owed her greatest
relief t'her friend Lucas, who often joined them, and good-naturedly
engaged Collins’s conversation t'herself. 

 She was at least free from
t'offense of Darcy’s further notice; though often standing within a short
distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough t'speak.
T'Longbourn party were t'last of all t'company t'depart, and, by a
manoeuvre of Bennet,'d t'wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour
after everybody else was gone, which gave them time t'see how heartily
they were wished away by some of t'family. 

 Hurst, her sister scarcely
opened their mouths, except t'complain of fatigue, and were evidently
impatient t'have t'house t'themselves. They repulsed every attempt of
Bennet at conversation, by so doing threw a languor over t'whole party,
which was little relieved by the long speeches of Collins, who was
complimenting Bingley, his sisters on t'elegance of their entertainment,
t'hospitality and politeness which'd marked their behaviour t'their
guests. Elizabeth preserved as steady a silence as either Hurst/Bingley;
even Lydia was too much fatigued t'utter more than t'occasional
exclamation of “, how tired I am!” accompanied by a violent yawn.
Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking
t'earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London,
whither he was obliged t'go t'next day for a short time. 

 Bennet was
perfectly satisfied, quitted t'house under the delightful persuasion that,
allowing for t'necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages,
wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at
Netherfield in t'course of three/four months. Elizabeth was t'least dear
t'her of all her children; though the man, t'match were quite good enough
for her, t'worth of each was eclipsed by Bingley, Netherfield. 

 Having
resolved t'do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended
only t't'following Saturday, having no feelings of diffidence t'make it
distressing t'himself even at t'moment, he set about it in a orderly
manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a regular part of
t'business. 

 “May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair
daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for t'honour of a private audience with
her in the course of this morning?” Before Elizabeth'd time for anything
but a blush of surprise, Bennet answered instantly, “Oh dear!--yes--
certainly. 

 Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs.” And, gathering her work
together, she was hastening away, when Elizabeth called out: 

 I desire
you t'stay where you're.” And upon Elizabeth’s seeming really, with vexed,
embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added: “Lizzy, I insist upon your
staying, hearing Collins.” Elizabeth wouldn't oppose such an injunction--
and a moment’s consideration making her also sensible that it'd be wisest
t'get it over as soon, as quietly as possible, she sat down again, tried
to conceal, by incessant employment t'feelings which were divided between
distress, diversion. “Believe me, my dear Elizabeth, that your modesty, so
far from doing you any disservice, rather adds t'your other perfections.
You would've been less amiable in my eyes'd there not been this little
unwillingness; but allow me t'assure you, that I've your respected
mother’s permission for this address. 

 You can hardly doubt the purport
of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you to dissemble;
my attentions have been too marked t'be mistaken. 

 But before I am run
away with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it'd be advisable for me
t'state my reasons for marrying--and, moreover, for coming
int'Hertfordshire with t'design of selecting a wife, as I certainly did.”
T'idea of Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by
his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use
t'short pause he allowed in any attempt t'stop him further, and he
continued: 

 “My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right
thing for every clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) t'set
t'example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that
it'll add greatly t'my happiness; thirdly--which perhaps I ought t'have
mentioned earlier, that 'tis t'particular advice and recommendation of
t'noble lady whom I've t'honour of calling patroness. on this subject;
'twas but t'Saturday night before I left Hunsford--between our pools at
quadrille, while Jenkinson was arranging de Bourgh’s footstool, that she
said, ‘Collins, you must marry. 

 Find such a woman as soon as you can,
bring her t'Hunsford, I'll visit her.’ Allow me, by the way, t'observe, my
fair cousin, that I don't reckon t'notice and kindness of Catherine de
Bourgh as among t'least of the advantages in my power t'offer. You'll find
her manners beyond anything I can describe; your wit, vivacity, I think,
must be acceptable t'her, especially when tempered with t'silence and
respect which her rank will inevitably excite. 

 Thus much for my general
intention in favour of matrimony; it remains t'be told why my views were
directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where I can
assure you there're many amiable young women. T'fortune I am perfectly
indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since
I am well aware that it couldn't be complied with; that one thousand
pounds in t'four per cents, which won't be yours till after your mother’s
decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head, therefore,
I'll be uniformly silent; you may assure yourself that no ungenerous
reproach shall ever pass my lips when we're married.” 

 “I ain't now
t'learn,” replied Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, “that 'tis
usual with young ladies t'reject t'addresses of the man whom they secretly
mean t'accept, when he first applies for their favour; that sometimes
t'refusal is repeated a second,/even a third time. Nay, were your friend
Catherine t'know me, I am persuaded she'd find me in every respect ill
qualified for the situation.” 

 In making me t'offer, you must've
satisfied t'delicacy of your feelings with regard t'my family, may take
possession of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-
reproach. 

 “When I do myself t'honour of speaking t'you next on
t'subject, I shall hope t'receive a more favourable answer than you've now
given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because
I know it t'be t'established custom of your sex t'reject a man on t'first
application, perhaps you've even now said as much to encourage my suit as
would be consistent with t'true delicacy of the female character.” “You
must give me leave t'flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of
my addresses is merely words of course. 

 My reasons for believing it are
briefly these: It doesn't appear t'me that my hand is unworthy of your
acceptance,/that t'establishment I can offer would be any other than
highly desirable. 

 My situation in life, my connections with t'family of
de Bourgh, my relationship t'your own, are circumstances highly in my
favour; you should take it int'further consideration, that in spite of
your manifold attractions, 'tis by no means certain that another offer of
marriage may ever be made you. Your portion is unhappily so small that
it'll in all likelihood undo t'effects of your loveliness, amiable
qualifications. 

 As I must therefore conclude that you'ren't serious in
your rejection of me, I'll choose t'attribute it t'your wish of increasing
my love by suspense, according t't'usual practice of elegant females.” “I
do assure you, sir, that I've no pretensions whatever t'that kind of
elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. Don't consider me
now as an elegant female, intending t'plague you, but as a rational
creature, speaking t'truth from her heart.” 

 “You're uniformly
charming!” cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; “and I am persuaded
that when sanctioned by t'express authority of both your excellent
parents, my proposals won't fail of being acceptable.” T'such perseverance
in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, immediately, in
silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated
refusals as flattering encouragement, t'apply t'her father, whose negative
might be uttered in such a manner as t'be decisive, whose behaviour at
least could not be mistaken for t'affectation, coquetry of an elegant
female. Collins wasn't left long t't'silent contemplation of his
successful love; for Bennet, having dawdled about in t'vestibule t'watch
for t'end of t'conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth open t'door, with quick
step pass her towards t'staircase, than she entered t'breakfast-room,
congratulated both him, herself in warm terms on t'happy prospect of their
nearer connection. Collins received, returned these felicitations with
equal pleasure, then proceeded t'relate t'particulars of their interview,
with t'result of which he trusted he'd every reason t'be satisfied, since
the refusal which his cousin'd steadfastly given him would naturally flow
from her bashful modesty, t'genuine delicacy of her character. 

 This
information startled Bennet; she'd've been glad t'be equally satisfied
that her daughter'd meant t'encourage him by protesting against his
proposals, but she dared not believe it, and couldn't help saying so.
“Pardon me for interrupting you, madam but if she's really headstrong,
foolish, I know not whether she'd altogether be a desirable wife t'a man
in my situation, who naturally looks for happiness in t'marriage state.
If therefore she actually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were
better not t'force her int'accepting me, because if liable t'such defects
of temper, she couldn't contribute much t'my felicity.” 

 Bennet raised
his eyes from his book as she entered, fixed them on her face with a calm
unconcern which wasn't in t'least altered by her communication.
Elizabeth couldn't but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but
Bennet, who'd persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as
she wished, was excessively disappointed. He thought too well of himself
t'comprehend on what motives his cousin could refuse him; though his pride
was hurt, he suffered in no other way. 

 His regard for her was quite
imaginary; t'possibility of her deserving her mother’s reproach prevented
his feeling any regret. 

 She was met in t'vestibule by Lydia, who,
flying to her, cried in a half whisper, “I am glad you're come, for
there's such fun here! Charlotte hardly'd time t'answer, before they were
joined by Kitty, who came t'tell t'same news; no sooner'd they entered the
breakfast-room, where Bennet was alone, than she likewise began on
t'subject, calling on Lucas for her compassion, entreating her t'persuade
her friend Lizzy t'comply with t'wishes of all her family. 

 “Pray do, my
dear Lucas,” she added in a melancholy tone, “for nobody is on my side,
nobody takes part with me. 

 “Aye, there she comes looking as unconcerned
as may be, caring no more for us than if we were at York, provided she can
have her own way. 

 But I tell you, Lizzy--if you take it int'your head
t'go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you'll never get a
husband at all--and I am sure I don't know who's t'maintain you when your
father is dead. 

 People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can
have no great inclination for talking. Her daughters listened in silence
t'this effusion, sensible that any attempt t'reason with her/soot'her
would only increase the irritation. 

 Elizabeth passed quietly out of
t'room, Jane, Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground, determined
t'hear all she could; Charlotte, detained first by t'civility of Collins,
whose inquiries after herself, all her family were minute, then by a
little curiosity, satisfied herself with walking t't'window, pretending
not t'hear. 

 Perhaps not t'less so from feeling a doubt of my positive
happiness'd my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I've often
observed that resignation is never so perfect as when t'blessing denied
begins t'lose somewhat of its value in our estimation. 

 You won't, I
hope, consider me as showing any disrespect t'your family, my dear madam,
by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter’s favour, without
having paid yourself, Bennet the compliment of requesting you t'interpose
your authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in
having accepted my dismission from your daughter’s lips instead of your
own. 

 My object has been t'secure an amiable companion for myself, with
due consideration for t'advantage of all your family, if my manner has
been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave t'apologise.” T'discussion of
Collins’s offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth'd only t'suffer
from t'uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, occasionally from
some peevish allusions of her mother. 

 He scarcely ever spoke t'her,
t'assiduous attentions which he'd been so sensible of himself were
transferred for t'rest of t'day t'Lucas, whose civility in listening t'him
was a seasonable relief t'them all, and especially t'her friend. Elizabeth
had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did
not appear in t'least affected by it. 

 “I found as t'time drew near that
I'd better not meet Darcy; that t'be in t'same room, t'same party with him
for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, that scenes
might arise unpleasant t'more than myself.” 

 She highly approved his
forbearance, they'd leisure for a full discussion of it, for all
t'commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham,
another officer walked back with them t'Longbourn, during t'walk he
particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double
advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered t'herself, 'twas most
acceptable as an occasion of introducing him t'her father, mother.
T'envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well
covered with a lady’s fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister’s
countenance change as she read it, saw her dwelling intently on some
particular passages. 

 Jane recollected herself soon, putting t'letter
away, tried t'join with her usual cheerfulness in t'general conversation;
but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on t'subject which drew off her attention
even from Wickham; no sooner'd he, his companion taken leave, than a
glance from Jane invited her t'follow her up stairs. T'whole party have
left Netherfield by this time, are on their way t'town--and without any
intention of coming back again. 

 She then read t'first sentence aloud,
which comprised t'information of their having just resolved t'follow their
brother t'town directly, and of their meaning t'dine in Grosvenor Street,
where Hurst'd a house. T'next was in these words: “I don't pretend
t'regret anything I'll leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my
dearest friend; but we'll hope, at some future period, t'enjoy many
returns of that delightful intercourse we've known, in t'meanwhile may
lessen t'pain of separation by a frequent, most unreserved correspondence.
I depend on you for that.” T'these highflown expressions Elizabeth
listened with all t'insensibility of distrust; and though t'suddenness of
their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really t'lament;
'twasn't t'be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent
Bingley’s being there; as t't'loss of their society, she was persuaded
that Jane must cease to regard it, in t'enjoyment of his. But may we not
hope that t'period of future happiness t'which Bingley looks forward may
arrive earlier than she's aware, that t'delightful intercourse you've
known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters?
“When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that t'business which took
him t'London might be concluded in three/four days; but as we are certain
it cannot be so, at t'same time convinced that when Charles gets t'town
he'll be in no hurry t'leave it again, we've determined on following him
thither, that he mayn't be obliged t'spend his vacant hours in a
comfortless hotel. 

 Many of my acquaintances are already there for
t'winter; I wish that I could hear that you, my dearest friend,'d any
intention of making one of t'crowd--but of that I despair. 

 I sincerely
hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in t'gaieties which that
season generally brings, that your beaux will be so numerous as t'prevent
your feeling t'loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.” 

 I
really don't think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance,
accomplishments; and t'affection she inspires in Louisa, myself is
heightened into something still more interesting, from t'hope we dare
entertain of her being hereafter our sister. 

 I don't know whether I
ever before mentioned t'you my feelings on this subject; but I'll not
leave the country without confiding them, I trust you won't esteem them
unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he'll have frequent
opportunity now of seeing her on t'most intimate footing; her relations
all wish t'connection as much as his own; a sister’s partiality isn't
misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any
woman’s heart. 

 With all these circumstances to favour an attachment,
nothing t'prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging t'hope of
an event which will secure t'happiness of so many?” 

 Does it not
expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me t'be her
sister; that she's perfectly convinced of her brother’s indifference; that
if she suspects t'nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!)
But the case is this: We'ren't rich enough/grand enough for them; she is
t'more anxious t'get Darcy for her brother, from t'notion that when
there's been one intermarriage, she may've less trouble in achieving a
second; in which there's certainly some ingenuity, and it'd succeed, if de
Bourgh were out of t'way. “You must decide for yourself, if, upon mature
deliberation, you find that t'misery of disobliging his two sisters is
more than equivalent t't'happiness of being his wife, I advise you by all
means t'refuse him.” 

 She represented t'her sister as forcibly as
possible what she felt on t'subject,'d soon t'pleasure of seeing its happy
effect. Jane’s temper wasn't desponding, she was gradually led t'hope,
though t'diffidence of affection sometimes overcame t'hope, that Bingley
would return t'Netherfield, answer every wish of her heart. They agreed
that Bennet should only hear of t'departure of the family, without being
alarmed on t'score of t'gentleman’s conduct; but even this partial
communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as
exceedingly unlucky that t'ladies should happen t'go away just as they
were all getting so intimate together. 

 After lamenting it at some
length, she'd t'consolation that Bingley would be soon down again, soon
dining at Longbourn, the conclusion of all was t'comfortable declaration,
that though he'd been invited only t'a family dinner, she'd take care
t'have two full courses. “It keeps him in good humour, I am more obliged
t'you than I can express.” Charlotte assured her friend of her
satisfaction in being useful, and that it amply repaid her for t'little
sacrifice of her time. This was very amiable, but Charlotte’s kindness
extended farther than Elizabeth had any conception of; its object
wasn'thing else than t'secure her from any return of Collins’s addresses,
by engaging them towards herself. Such was Lucas’s scheme; appearances
were so favourable, that when they parted at night, she'd've felt almost
secure of success if he'dn't been t'leave Hertfordshire so very soon.
But here she did injustice t't'fire, independence of his character, for it
led him t'escape out of Longbourn House t'next morning with admirable
slyness, hasten t'Lucas Lodge t'throw himself at her feet. 

 He was
anxious t'avoid t'notice of his cousins, from a conviction that if they
saw him depart, they couldn't fail to conjecture his design, he wasn't
willing t'have t'attempt known till its success might be known likewise;
for though feeling almost secure, with reason, for Charlotte'd been
tolerably encouraging, he was comparatively diffident since t'adventure of
Wednesday. 

 In as short a time as Collins’s long speeches would allow,
everything was settled between them t't'satisfaction of both; as they
entered t'house he earnestly entreated her t'name t'day that was t'make
him t'happiest of men; though such a solicitation must be waived for
t'present, t'lady felt no inclination t'trifle with his happiness.
William, Lucas were speedily applied t'for their consent; and 'twas
bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. 

 Collins’s present circumstances
made it a most eligible match for their daughter, t'whom they could give
little fortune; his prospects of future wealth were exceedingly fair.
Lucas began directly t'calculate, with more interest than t'matter'd ever
excited before, how many years longer Bennet was likely t'live; William
gave it as his decided opinion, that whenever Collins should be in
possession of the Longbourn estate, it'd be highly expedient that both he,
his wife should make their appearance at St. James’s. 

 T'younger girls
formed hopes of coming out a year/two sooner than they might otherwise
have done; t'boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte’s
dying an old maid. 

 Collins, t'be sure, was neither sensible nor
agreeable; his society was irksome, his attachment t'her must be
imaginary. Without thinking highly either of men/matrimony, marriage'd
always been her object; 'twas t'only provision for well-educated young
women of small fortune, and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be
their pleasantest preservative from want. 

 Elizabeth would wonder, and
probably would blame her; though her resolution wasn't t'be shaken, her
feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. 

 A promise of secrecy
was of course very dutifully given, but it couldn't be kept without
difficulty; for the curiosity excited by his long absence burst forth in
such direct questions on his return as required some ingenuity t'evade, he
was at t'same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing to
publish his prosperous love. 

 As he was t'begin his journey too early on
t'morrow t'see any of the family, t'ceremony of leave-taking was performed
when t'ladies moved for t'night; Bennet, with great politeness,
cordiality, said how happy they should be t'see him at Longbourn again,
whenever his engagements might allow him t'visit them. 

 “My dear madam
this invitation is particularly gratifying, because 'tis what I've been
hoping t'receive; and you may be certain that I'll avail myself of it as
soon as possible.” “My dear sir I am particularly obliged t'you for this
friendly caution, you may depend upon my not taking so material a step
without her ladyship’s concurrence.” 

 Risk anything rather than her
displeasure; if you find it likely t'be raised by your coming t'us again,
which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home, and be
satisfied that we shall take no offence.” 

 “Believe me, my dear sir, my
gratitude is warmly excited by such affectionate attention; depend upon
it, you'll speedily receive from me a letter of thanks for this, for every
other mark of your regard during my stay in Hertfordshire. With proper
civilities t'ladies then withdrew; all of them equally surprised that he
meditated a quick return. 

 Bennet wished to understand by it that he
thought of paying his addresses t'one of her younger girls, Mary might've
been prevailed on t'accept him. 

 She rated his abilities much higher
than any of t'others; there was a solidity in his reflections which often
struck her, though by no means so clever as herself, she thought that if
encouraged t'read and improve himself by such an example as hers, he might
become a very agreeable companion. 

 T'steady countenance which Lucas'd
commanded in telling her story, gave way t'a momentary confusion here on
receiving so direct a reproach; though, as 'twas no more than she
expected, she soon regained her composure, calmly replied: But Elizabeth'd
now recollected herself, making a strong effort for it, was able t'assure
with tolerable firmness that t'prospect of their relationship was highly
grateful t'her, that she wished her all imaginable happiness. I ask only a
comfortable home; considering Collins’s character, connection, situation
in life, I am convinced that my chance of happiness with him is as fair as
most people can boast on entering t'marriage state.” 

 She'd always felt
that Charlotte’s opinion of matrimony was not exactly like her own, but
she'dn't supposed it t'be possible that, when called int'action, she'd've
sacrificed every better feeling t'worldly advantage. Elizabeth was sitting
with her mother, sisters, reflecting on what she'd heard, doubting whether
she was authorised t'mention it, when William Lucas himself appeared, sent
by his daughter, to announce her engagement t't'family. 

 With many
compliments t'them, and much self-gratulation on t'prospect of a
connection between the houses, he unfolded t'matter--t'an audience not
merely wondering, but incredulous; for Bennet, with more perseverance than
politeness, protested he must be entirely mistaken; Lydia, always
unguarded and often uncivil, boisterously exclaimed: Nothing less than
t'complaisance of a courtier could've borne without anger such treatment;
but William’s good breeding carried him through it all; though he begged
leave t'be positive as t'the truth of his information, he listened t'all
their impertinence with the most forbearing courtesy. Elizabeth, feeling
it incumbent on her t'relieve him from so unpleasant a situation, now put
herself forward t'confirm his account, by mentioning her prior knowledge
of it from Charlotte herself; and endeavoured t'put a stop
t't'exclamations of her mother, sisters by t'earnestness of her
congratulations t'William, in which she was readily joined by Jane, by
making a variety of remarks on the happiness that might be expected from
t'match, t'excellent character of Collins, t'convenient distance of
Hunsford from London. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered t'say a
great deal while William remained; but no sooner'd he left them than her
feelings found a rapid vent. 

 In t'first place, she persisted in
disbelieving t'whole of t'matter; secondly, she was sure that Collins had
been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they'd never be happy together;
fourthly, that t'match might be broken off. Two inferences were plainly
deduced from t'whole: one, that Elizabeth was t'real cause of t'mischief;
t'other that she herself'd been barbarously misused by them all; on these
two points she principally dwelt during t'rest of t'day. Jane confessed
herself a little surprised at t'match; but she said less of her
astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness; nor could
Elizabeth persuade her t'consider it as improbable. Kitty and Lydia were
far from envying Lucas, for Collins was only a clergyman; it affected them
in no other way than as a piece of news t'spread at Meryton. Her
disappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard t'her sister,
of whose rectitude, delicacy she was sure her opinion could never be
shaken, for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious, as Bingley'd now
been gone a week, nothing more was heard of his return. Jane'd sent
Caroline an early answer t'her letter, was counting t'days till she might
reasonably hope t'hear again. T'promised letter of thanks from Collins
arrived on Tuesday, addressed to their father, written with all
t'solemnity of gratitude which a twelvemonth’s abode in t'family might've
prompted. 

 After discharging his conscience on that head, he proceeded
t'inform them, with many rapturous expressions, of his happiness in having
obtained t'affection of their amiable neighbour, Lucas, then explained
that 'twas merely with t'view of enjoying her society that he'd been so
ready t'close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn,
whither he hoped t'be able t'return on Monday fortnight; for Catherine, he
added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it t'take place
as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerable argument
with his amiable Charlotte t'name an early day for making him t'happiest
of men. 

 Such were t'gentle murmurs of Bennet, and they gave way only
t't'greater distress of Bingley’s continued absence. Even Elizabeth began
t'fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but that his sisters would be
successful in keeping him away. Unwilling as she was t'admit an idea so
destructive of Jane’s happiness, so dishonorable t't'stability of her
lover, she couldn't prevent its frequently occurring. 

 T'united efforts
of his two unfeeling sisters and of his overpowering friend, assisted by
t'attractions of Darcy, t'amusements of London might be too much, she
feared, for t'strength of his attachment. 

 But as no such delicacy
restrained her mother, an hour seldom passed in which she didn't talk of
Bingley, express her impatience for his arrival,/even require Jane
t'confess that if he didn't come back she'd think herself ill used.
Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but his reception at
Longbourn wasn't quite so gracious as it'd been on his first introduction.
T'chief of every day was spent by him at Lucas Lodge, he sometimes
returned t'Longbourn only in time t'make an apology for his absence before
t'family went t'bed. Whenever Charlotte came t'see them, she concluded her
t'be anticipating t'hour of possession; and whenever she spoke in a low
voice t'Collins, was convinced that they were talking of t'Longbourn
estate, resolving t'turn herself and her daughters out of t'house, as soon
as Bennet were dead. 

 “, Bennet 'tis hard t'think that Charlotte Lucas
should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced to make way
for her, live t'see her take her place in it!” 

 T'first sentence
conveyed t'assurance of their being all settled in London for t'winter,
concluded with her brother’s regret at not having had time t'pay his
respects t'his friends in Hertfordshire before he left t'country. 

 Hope
was over, entirely over; when Jane could attend t't'rest of t'letter, she
found little, except t'professed affection of the writer, that could give
her any comfort. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, Caroline
boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, ventured t'predict
t'accomplishment of t'wishes which'd been unfolded in her former letter.
She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother’s being an inmate of
Darcy’s house, mentioned with raptures some plans of t'latter with regard
t'new furniture. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than
she had ever done; much as she'd always been disposed t'like him, she
couldn't think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of
temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him t'slave of his
designing friends, led him t'sacrifice of his own happiness t't'caprice of
their inclination. 

 She could think of nothing else; yet whether
Bingley’s regard'd really died away,/were suppressed by his friends’
interference; whether he'd been aware of Jane’s attachment,/whether it'd
escaped his observation; whatever were t'case, though her opinion of him
must be materially affected by t'difference, her sister’s situation
remained t'same, her peace equally wounded. 

 A day/two passed before
Jane'd courage t'speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last, on
Bennet’s leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about
Netherfield, its master, she could not help saying: 

 With a stronger
voice she soon added, “I've this comfort immediately, that it'sn't been
more than an error of fancy on my side, that it has done no harm t'anyone
but myself.” 

 Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, threw
back t'praise on her sister’s warm affection. T'more I see of t'world,
t'more am I dissatisfied with it; every day confirms my belief of
t'inconsistency of all human characters, of the little dependence that can
be placed on t'appearance of merit or sense. 

 Remember that she's one of
a large family; that as t'fortune, 'tis a most eligible match; be ready
t'believe, for everybody’s sake, that she may feel something like regard,
esteem for our cousin.” 

 “T'oblige you, I'd try t'believe almost
anything, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for
were I persuaded that Charlotte'd any regard for him, I should only think
worse of her understanding than I now do of her heart. 

 You shan't, for
t'sake of one individual, change t'meaning of principle, integrity, nor
endeavour t'persuade yourself/me, that selfishness is prudence,
insensibility of danger security for happiness.” 

 “I must think your
language too strong in speaking of both,” replied Jane; “and I hope you'll
be convinced of it by seeing them happy together. 

 I cannot
misunderstand you, but I entreat you, dear Lizzy, not t'pain me by
thinking that person t'blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. “I
am far from attributing any part of Bingley’s conduct t'design,” said
Elizabeth; “but without scheming t'do wrong,/t'make others unhappy, there
may be error, there may be misery. “Beyond a doubt, they do wish him
t'choose Darcy,” replied Jane; “but this may be from better feelings than
you're supposing. I ain't ashamed of having been mistaken--or, at least,
'tis light, 'tisn'thing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking
ill of him/his sisters. 

 Elizabeth couldn't oppose such a wish; from
this time Bingley’s name was scarcely ever mentioned between them. Bennet
still continued t'wonder, repine at his returning no more, though a day
seldom passed in which Elizabeth didn't account for it clearly, there was
little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. 

 Her
daughter endeavoured t'convince her of what she didn't believe herself,
that his attentions t'Jane'd been merely the effect of a common, transient
liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though t'probability of
t'statement was admitted at t'time, she'd t'same story t'repeat every day.
Wickham’s society was of material service in dispelling t'gloom which
t'late perverse occurrences'd thrown on many of t'Longbourn family. Bennet
was t'only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating
circumstances in t'case, unknown t't'society of Hertfordshire; her mild,
steady candour always pleaded for allowances, urged t'possibility of
mistakes--but by everybody else Darcy was condemned as t'worst of men.
After a week spent in professions of love, schemes of felicity, Collins
was called from his amiable Charlotte by t'arrival of Saturday. 

 T'pain
of separation might be alleviated on his side, by preparations for
t'reception of his bride; as he'd reason t'hope, that shortly after his
return int'Hertfordshire, t'day would be fixed that was t'make him
t'happiest of men. He took leave of his relations at Longbourn with as
much solemnity as before; wished his fair cousins health, happiness again,
promised their father another letter of thanks. Gardiner was a sensible,
gentlemanlike man, greatly superior t'his sister, as well by nature as
education. T'Netherfield ladies'd've'd difficulty in believing that a man
who lived by trade, within view of his own warehouses, could've been so
well-bred, agreeable. 

 Gardiner, who was several years younger than
Bennet, Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegant woman, a great
favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. 

 T'first part of Gardiner’s
business on her arrival was to distribute her presents, describe t'newest
fashions. It makes me nervous, poorly, t'be thwarted so in my own family,
t'have neighbours who think of themselves before anybody else. 

 However,
your coming just at this time is the greatest of comforts, I am glad
t'hear what you tell us, of long sleeves.” Gardiner, t'whom t'chief of
this news'd been given before, in t'course of Jane, Elizabeth’s
correspondence with her, made her sister a slight answer, and, in
compassion t'her nieces, turned the conversation. It doesn't often happen
that t'interference of friends will persuade a young man of independent
fortune t'think no more of a girl whom he was violently in love with only
a few days before.” “But that expression of ‘violently in love’ is so
hackneyed, so doubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me little idea. “I
never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quite inattentive
t'other people, wholly engrossed by her. At his own ball he offended
two/three young ladies, by not asking them t'dance; I spoke t'him twice
myself, without receiving an answer. 

 Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased
with this proposal, felt persuaded of her sister’s ready acquiescence.
“And that's quite impossible; for he's now in t'custody of his friend,
Darcy would no more suffer him t'call on Jane in such a part of London!
Darcy may perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he
would hardly think a month’s ablution enough t'cleanse him from its
impurities, were he once t'enter it; depend upon it, Bingley never stirs
without him.” But in spite of t'certainty in which Elizabeth affected
t'place this point, as well as t'still more interesting one of Bingley’s
being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on t'subject which
convinced her, on examination, that she didn't consider it entirely
hopeless. 'twas possible, sometimes she thought it probable, that his
affection might be reanimated, t'influence of his friends successfully
combated by t'more natural influence of Jane’s attractions. Bennet
accepted her aunt’s invitation with pleasure; the Bingleys were no
otherwise in her thoughts at t'same time, than as she hoped by Caroline’s
not living in t'same house with her brother, she might occasionally spend
a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him. 

 When t'engagement
was for home, some of t'officers always made part of it--of which officers
Wickham was sure t'be one; and on these occasions, Gardiner, rendered
suspicious by Elizabeth’s warm commendation, narrowly observed them both.
Without supposing them, from what she saw, t'be seriously in love, their
preference of each other was plain enough t'make her a little uneasy; and
she resolved t'speak t'Elizabeth on t'subject before she left
Hertfordshire, represent t'her t'imprudence of encouraging such an
attachment. About ten/a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she'd spent
a considerable time in that very part of Derbyshire t'which he belonged.
They'd, therefore, many acquaintances in common; though Wickham'd been
little there since t'death of Darcy’s father, 'twas yet in his power
t'give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she'd been in
t'way of procuring. 

 In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with
t'minute description which Wickham could give, in bestowing her tribute of
praise on t'character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him,
herself. 

 Gardiner’s caution t'Elizabeth was punctually, kindly given on
t'first favourable opportunity of speaking t'her alone; after honestly
telling her what she thought, she thus went on: “You're too sensible a
girl, Lizzy, t'fall in love merely because you're warned against it; and,
therefore, I ain't afraid of speaking openly. In short, my dear aunt, I
should be sorry t'be t'means of making any of you unhappy; but since we
see every day that where there's affection, young people are seldom
withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering into engagements with
each other, how can I promise t'be wiser than so many of my fellow-
creatures if I am tempted,/how am I even t'know that it would be wisdom
t'resist? Her aunt assured her that she was, Elizabeth having thanked her
for t'kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advice
being given on such a point, without being resented. Collins returned
int'Hertfordshire soon after it'd been quitted by t'Gardiners, Jane; but
as he took up his abode with t'Lucases, his arrival was no great
inconvenience t'Bennet. His marriage was now fast approaching, she was at
length so far resigned as t'think it inevitable, even repeatedly t'say, in
an ill-natured tone, that she “wished they might be happy.” Thursday was
t'be t'wedding day, and on Wednesday Lucas paid her farewell visit; when
she rose t'take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother’s ungracious and
reluctant good wishes, sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of
t'room. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; their correspondence was as
regular, frequent as it'd ever been; that it should be equally unreserved
was impossible. Charlotte’s first letters were received with a good deal
of eagerness; there couldn't but be curiosity t'know how she'd speak of
her new home, how she'd like Catherine, how happy she'd dare pronounce
herself to be; though, when t'letters were read, Elizabeth felt that
Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as she might've
foreseen. 

 T'house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all t'her
taste, Catherine’s behaviour was most friendly, obliging. 

 'twas
Collins’s picture of Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; Elizabeth
perceived that she must wait for her own visit there t'know t'rest.
Jane'd already written a few lines t'her sister t'announce their safe
arrival in London; when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in
her power t'say something of t'Bingleys. She accounted for it by supposing
that her last letter t'her friend from Longbourn'd by some accident been
lost. 

 “My aunt is gonna-morrow int'that part of the town, I'll take
t'opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street.” “I didn't think Caroline in
spirits but she was very glad t'see me, reproached me for giving her no
notice of my coming t'London. 

 After waiting at home every morning for a
fortnight, inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor did
at last appear; but t'shortness of her stay, yet more, t'alteration of her
manner would allow Jane t'deceive herself no longer. “My dearest Lizzy
will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgement, at my
expense, when I confess myself t'have been entirely deceived in Bingley’s
regard for me. 

 But, my dear sister, though t'event has proved you
right, don't think me obstinate if I still assert that, considering what
her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. 

 I
don't at all comprehend her reason for wishing t'be intimate with me; but
if t'same circumstances were to happen again, I am sure I should be
deceived again. 

 Caroline didn't return my visit till yesterday; not a
note, not a line, did I receive in t'meantime. 

 When she did come, 'twas
evident that she'd no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology,
for not calling before, said not a word of wishing t'see me again, was in
every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I was
perfectly resolved t'continue t'acquaintance no longer. 

 But I pity her,
because she must feel that she's been acting wrong, because I am sure that
anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. But I'll endeavour t'banish
every painful thought, and think only of what'll make me happy--your
affection, the invariable kindness of my dear uncle, aunt. This letter
gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that
Jane would no longer be duped, by t'sister at least. His character sunk on
every review of it; as a punishment for him, as well as a possible
advantage t'Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Darcy’s
sister, as by Wickham’s account, she'd make him abundantly regret what
he'd thrown away. Her heart'd been but slightly touched, her vanity was
satisfied with believing that she'd've been his only choice,'d fortune
permitted it. T'sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was t'most
remarkable charm of t'young lady t'whom he was now rendering himself
agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in
Charlotte’s, didn't quarrel with him for his wish of independence.
Nothing, on t'contrary, could be more natural; while able to suppose that
it cost him a few struggles t'relinquish her, she was ready t'allow it a
wise, desirable measure for both, could very sincerely wish him happy. All
this was acknowledged t'Gardiner; after relating the circumstances, she
thus went on: “I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I've never been much
in love; for'd I really experienced that pure and elevating passion, I
should at present detest his name, and wish him all manner of evil. My
watchfulness has been effectual; though I certainly should be a more
interesting object t'all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love with
him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. With no
greater events than these in t'Longbourn family, otherwise diversified by
little beyond t'walks t'Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did
January, February pass away. Absence'd increased her desire of seeing
Charlotte again, weakened her disgust of Collins. 

 There was novelty in
t'scheme, as, with such a mother, such uncompanionable sisters, home
couldn't be faultless, a little change wasn't unwelcome for its own sake.
T'only pain was in leaving her father, who'd certainly miss her, and who,
when it came t't'point, so little liked her going, that he told her
t'write t'him, almost promised t'answer her letter. 

 His present pursuit
couldn't make him forget that Elizabeth'd been t'first t'excite, t'deserve
his attention, the first t'listen, t'pity, t'first t'be admired; in his
manner of bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of
what she was t'expect in Catherine de Bourgh, trusting their opinion of
her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, there was a
solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a
most sincere regard; she parted from him convinced that, whether
married/single, he must always be her model of t'amiable and pleasing.
William Lucas, his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-
headed as himself, hadn'thing t'say that could be worth hearing, were
listened t'with about as much delight as t'rattle of t'chaise. 

 He could
tell her nothing new of t'wonders of his presentation, knighthood; his
civilities were worn out, like his information. As they drove t'Gardiner’s
door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; when they
entered t'passage she was there t'welcome them, Elizabeth, looking
earnestly in her face, was pleased t'see it healthful and lovely as ever.
On t'stairs were a troop of little boys, girls, whose eagerness for their
cousin’s appearance wouldn't allow them to wait in t'drawing-room, whose
shyness, as they'dn't seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming
lower. 

 Their first object was her sister; she was more grieved than
astonished t'hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane
always struggled t'support her spirits, there were periods of dejection.
Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Bingley’s visit in Gracechurch
Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between
Jane and herself, which proved that t'former had, from her heart, given up
the acquaintance. Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,
because it'd be imprudent; now, because he's trying t'get a girl with only
ten thousand pounds, you want t'find out that he's mercenary.” “But he
paid her not t'smallest attention till her grandfather’s death made her
mistress of this fortune.” 

 If it weren't allowable for him t'gain my
affections because I'd no money, what occasion could there be for making
love t'a girl whom he didn't care about, who was equally poor?” 

 “A man
in distressed circumstances hasn't time for all those elegant decorums
which other people may observe. I am gonna-morrow where I'll find a man
who'sn't one agreeable quality, who's neither manner nor sense t'recommend
him. 

 Before they were separated by t'conclusion of t'play, she'd the
unexpected happiness of an invitation t'accompany her uncle, aunt in a
tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in t'summer. Lakes, mountains,
rivers shan't be jumbled together in our imaginations; nor when we attempt
t'describe any particular scene, will we begin quarreling about its
relative situation. 

 Every object in t'next day’s journey was new,
interesting to Elizabeth; her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for
she'd seen her sister looking so well as t'banish all fear for her health,
and t'prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.
Collins, Charlotte appeared at t'door, t'carriage stopped at t'small gate
which led by a short gravel walk t't'house, amidst t'nods, smiles of
t'whole party. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure,
Elizabeth was more, more satisfied with coming when she found herself so
affectionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin’s manners
weren't altered by his marriage; his formal civility was just what it'd
been, he detained her some minutes at t'gate t'hear, satisfy his inquiries
after all her family. 

 They were then, with no other delay than his
pointing out the neatness of t'entrance, taken int't'house; as soon as
they were in t'parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious
formality t'his humble abode, punctually repeated all his wife’s offers of
refreshment. Elizabeth was prepared t'see him in his glory; she couldn't
help in fancying that in displaying t'good proportion of t'room, its
aspect, its furniture, he addressed himself particularly t'her, as if
wishing t'make her feel what she'd lost in refusing him. But though
everything seemed neat, comfortable, she wasn't able to gratify him by any
sigh of repentance, rather looked with wonder at her friend that she
could've so cheerful an air with such a companion. 

 When Collins said
anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly
wasn't unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. 

 After
sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in t'room, from
t'sideboard to t'fender, t'give an account of their journey, of all that'd
happened in London, Collins invited them t'take a stroll in the garden,
which was large, well laid out, t't'cultivation of which he attended
himself. 

 T'work in this garden was one of his most respectable
pleasures; Elizabeth admired t'command of countenance with which Charlotte
talked of t'healthfulness of t'exercise, and owned she encouraged it as
much as possible. 

 But of all t'views which his garden,/which
t'country/kingdom could boast, none were t'be compared with the prospect
of Rosings, afforded by an opening in t'trees that bordered t'park nearly
opposite t'front of his house. From his garden, Collins'd've led them
round his two meadows; but t'ladies, not having shoes t'encounter
t'remains of a white frost, turned back; while William accompanied him,
Charlotte took her sister, friend over t'house, extremely well pleased,
probably, t'have t'opportunity of showing it without her husband’s help.
'twas rather small, but well built, convenient; everything was fitted up,
arranged with a neatness, consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte
all t'credit. “Yes, Elizabeth, you'll have t'honour of seeing Catherine de
Bourgh on t'ensuing Sunday at church, I needn't say you'll be delighted
with her. I've scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you, my
sister Maria in every invitation with which she honours us during your
stay here. 

 T'evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire
news, and telling again what'd already been written; when it closed,
Elizabeth, in t'solitude of her chamber,'d t'meditate upon Charlotte’s
degree of contentment, t'understand her address in guiding, and composure
in bearing with, her husband, t'acknowledge that it was all done well.
She'd also t'anticipate how her visit would pass, t'quiet tenor of their
usual employments, t'vexatious interruptions of Collins, t'gaieties of
their intercourse with Rosings. About t'middle of t'next day, as she was
in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise below seemed t'speak
t'whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard
somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry, calling loudly after her.
Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more, and
down they ran int't'dining-room, which fronted t'lane, in quest of this
wonder; 'twas two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at the garden gate.
Collins, Charlotte were both standing at t'gate in conversation with
t'ladies; William, t'Elizabeth’s high diversion, was stationed in
t'doorway, in earnest contemplation of t'greatness before him, constantly
bowing whenever de Bourgh looked that way. Collins no sooner saw t'two
girls than he began t'congratulate them on their good fortune, which
Charlotte explained by letting them know that t'whole party was asked
t'dine at Rosings t'next day. 

 T'power of displaying t'grandeur of his
patroness t'his wondering visitors, of letting them see her civility
towards himself, his wife, was exactly what he'd wished for; that an
opportunity of doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of
Catherine’s condescension, as he knew not how t'admire enough. “I confess
that I shouldn't have been at all surprised by her ladyship’s asking us on
Sunday t'drink tea, spend t'evening at Rosings. 

 “I am t'less surprised
at what's happened,” replied William, “from that knowledge of what
t'manners of t'great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me
t'acquire. 

 Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were
t'expect, that t'sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a
dinner, mightn't wholly overpower them. While they were dressing, he came
two/three times t'their different doors, t'recommend their being quick, as
Catherine much objected t'be kept waiting for her dinner. 

 Such
formidable accounts of her ladyship, her manner of living, quite
frightened Maria Lucas who'd been little used t'company, she looked
forward t'her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her
father'd done t'his presentation at St. James’s. Every park has its
beauty, its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much t'be pleased with, though
she couldn't be in such raptures as Collins expected t'scene t'inspire,
was but slightly affected by his enumeration of t'windows in front of the
house, his relation of what t'glazing altogether'd originally cost Lewis
de Bourgh. When they ascended t'steps t't'hall, Maria’s alarm was every
moment increasing, even William didn't look perfectly calm. She'd heard
nothing of Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents
or miraculous virtue, t'mere stateliness of money/rank she thought she
could witness without trepidation. 

 From t'entrance-hall, of which
Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, t'fine proportion, t'finished
ornaments, they followed t'servants through an ante-chamber, t't'room
where Catherine, her daughter, Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship, with
great condescension, arose t'receive them; as Collins had settled it with
her husband that t'office of introduction should be hers, 'twas performed
in a proper manner, without any of those apologies, thanks which he'd've
thought necessary. 

 In spite of having been at St. James’s, William was
so completely awed by t'grandeur surrounding him, that he'd but just
courage enough t'make a low bow, take his seat without saying a word; and
his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on t'edge of her
chair, not knowing which way t'look. Her air wasn't conciliating, nor was
her manner of receiving them such as t'make her visitors forget their
inferior rank. 

 She wasn't rendered formidable by silence; but whatever
she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone, as marked her self-
importance, brought Wickham immediately to Elizabeth’s mind; from
t'observation of t'day altogether, she believed Catherine t'be exactly
what he represented. 

 When, after examining t'mother, in whose
countenance, deportment she soon found some resemblance of Darcy, she
turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria’s
astonishment at her being so thin, so small. 

 de Bourgh was pale,
sickly; her features, though not plain, were insignificant; she spoke very
little, except in a low voice, t'Jenkinson, in whose appearance there
wasn'thing remarkable, who was entirely engaged in listening t'what she
said, placing a screen in t'proper direction before her eyes. After
sitting a few minutes, they were all sent t'one of t'windows to admire
t'view, Collins attending them t'point out its beauties, and Catherine
kindly informing them that 'twas much better worth looking at in t'summer.
T'dinner was exceedingly handsome, there were all t'servants and all
t'articles of plate which Collins'd promised; and, as he'd likewise
foretold, he took his seat at t'bottom of t'table, by her ladyship’s
desire, looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. He
carved, ate, praised with delighted alacrity; every dish was commended,
first by him, then by William, who was now enough recovered t'echo
whatever his son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered
Catherine could bear. But Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive
admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on
t'table proved a novelty t'them. 

 Elizabeth was ready t'speak whenever
there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte, de Bourgh--
t'former of whom was engaged in listening t'Catherine, t'latter said not a
word t'her all dinner-time. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how
little de Bourgh ate, pressing her t'try some other dish, fearing she was
indisposed. When t'ladies returned t't'drawing-room, there was little to
be done but t'hear Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission
till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so
decisive a manner, as proved that she wasn't used to have her judgement
controverted. She inquired int'Charlotte’s domestic concerns familiarly,
minutely, gave her a great deal of advice as t't'management of them all;
told her how everything ought t'be regulated in so small a family as hers,
instructed her as t'the care of her cows, her poultry. 

 Elizabeth found
that nothing was beneath this great lady’s attention, which could furnish
her with an occasion of dictating t'others. In t'intervals of her
discourse with Collins, she addressed a variety of questions t'Maria and
Elizabeth, but especially t't'latter, of whose connections she knew
t'least, who she observed t'Collins was a genteel, pretty kind of girl.
She asked her, at different times, how many sisters she'd, whether they
were older/younger than herself, whether any of them were likely t'be
married, whether they were handsome, where they had been educated, what
carriage her father kept, what'd been her mother’s maiden name? “Aye, no
doubt; but that's what a governess will prevent, if I had known your
mother, I should've advised her most strenuously t'engage one. 

 But
really, ma’am, I think it'd be hard upon younger sisters, that they
shouldn't have their share of society and amusement, because t'elder
mayn't have t'means/inclination to marry early. 

 Catherine seemed quite
astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected
herself t'be t'first creature who'd ever dared t'trifle with so much
dignified impertinence. Catherine, William, , Collins sat down
t'quadrille; as de Bourgh chose t'play at cassino, the two girls'd
t'honour of assisting Jenkinson t'make up her party. Scarcely a syllable
was uttered that didn't relate t't'game, except when Jenkinson expressed
her fears of de Bourgh’s being too hot/too cold, or having too much/too
little light. 

 When Catherine, her daughter'd played as long as they
chose, t'tables were broken up, t'carriage was offered t'Collins,
gratefully accepted, immediately ordered. 

 From these instructions they
were summoned by t'arrival of t'coach; with many speeches of thankfulness
on Collins’s side, as many bows on William’s they departed. As soon as
they'd driven from t'door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin t'give
her opinion of all that she'd seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte’s
sake, she made more favourable than it really was. 

 But her
commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy
Collins, he was soon obliged t'take her ladyship’s praise int'his own
hands. 

 William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his vis'twas long
enough t'convince him of his daughter’s being most comfortably settled,
and of her possessing such a husband, such a neighbour as weren't often
met with. 

 While William was with them, Collins devoted his morning
t'driving him out in his gig, showing him t'country; but when he went
away, t'whole family returned t'their usual employments, and Elizabeth was
thankful t'find that they didn't see more of her cousin by t'alteration,
for t'chief of t'time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him
either at work in t'garden/in reading, writing, looking out of t'window in
his own book-room, which fronted t'road. Elizabeth'd at first rather
wondered that Charlotte shouldn't prefer t'dining-parlour for common use;
'twas a better sized room,'d a more pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that
her friend'd an excellent reason for what she did, for Collins would
undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment,'d they sat in one
equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for t'arrangement. From
t'drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in t'lane, and were indebted
t'Collins for t'knowledge of what carriages went along, how often
especially de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming
t'inform them of, though it happened almost every day. 

 Very few days
passed in which Collins didn't walk t'Rosings, and not many in which his
wife didn't think it necessary t'go likewise; and till Elizabeth
recollected that there might be other family livings t'be disposed of, she
couldn't understand t'sacrifice of so many hours. 

 Now, then they were
honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her
observation that was passing in t'room during these visits. She examined
int'their employments, looked at their work, and advised them t'do it
differently; found fault with t'arrangement of t'furniture;/detected
t'housemaid in negligence; if she accepted any refreshment, seemed t'do it
only for t'sake of finding out that Collins’s joints of meat were too
large for her family. Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great
lady wasn't in commission of t'peace of t'county, she was a most active
magistrate in her own parish, t'minutest concerns of which were carried
t'her by Collins; whenever any of t'cottagers were disposed to be
quarrelsome, discontented,/too poor, she sallied forth int'the village
t'settle their differences, silence their complaints, scold them
int'harmony, plenty. 

 This, however, was no evil t'Elizabeth, upon
t'whole she spent her time comfortably enough; there were half-hours of
pleasant conversation with Charlotte, t'weather was so fine for t'time of
year that she'd often great enjoyment out of doors. 

 Easter was
approaching, t'week preceding 'twas t'bring an addition t't'family at
Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. 

 Elizabeth'd
heard soon after her arrival that Darcy was expected there in t'course of
a few weeks, though there weren't many of her acquaintances whom she
didn't prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new t'look at in
their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless
Bingley’s designs on him were, by his behaviour t'his cousin, for whom he
was evidently destined by Catherine, who talked of his coming with
t'greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of t'highest admiration,
and seemed almost angry t'find that he'd already been frequently seen by
Lucas, herself. 

 His arrival was soon known at t'Parsonage; for Collins
was walking t'whole morning within view of t'lodges opening int'Hunsford
Lane, in order t'have t'earliest assurance of it, after making his bow as
t'carriage turned int't'Park, hurried home with t'great intelligence.
There were two nephews of Catherine t'require them, for Darcy'd brought
with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, t'younger son of his uncle ----, and,
t't'great surprise of all t'party, when Collins returned, t'gentlemen
accompanied him. 

 Charlotte'd seen them from her husband’s room,
crossing t'road, immediately running int't'other, told t'girls what an
honour they might expect, adding: 

 Elizabeth'd scarcely time t'disclaim
all right t't'compliment, before their approach was announced by t'door-
bell, shortly afterwards t'three gentlemen entered t'room. 

 Darcy looked
just as he'd been used t'look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with
his usual reserve, t'Collins, whatever might be his feelings toward her
friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Colonel Fitzwilliam
entered int'conversation directly with the readiness, ease of a well-bred
man, talked pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight
observation on t'house and garden t'Collins, sat for some time without
speaking t'anybody. 

 She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but
she wished t'see whether he'd betray any consciousness of what'd passed
between t'Bingleys, Jane, she thought he looked a little confused as he
answered that he'd never been so fortunate as t'meet Bennet. 

 Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s manners were much admired at t'Parsonage, and t'ladies all
felt that he must add considerably t't'pleasures of their engagements at
Rosings. 

 'twas some days before they received any invitation thither--
for while there were visitors in the house, they couldn't be necessary;
'twasn't till Easter-day, almost a week after t'gentlemen’s arrival, that
they were honoured by such an attention, then they were merely asked on
leaving church to come there in t'evening. 

 Her ladyship received them
civilly, but 'twas plain that their company was by no means so acceptable
as when she could get nobody else; she was, in fact, almost engrossed by
her nephews, speaking t'them, especially t'Darcy, much more than t'any
other person in t'room. 

 Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad t'see
them; anything was a welcome relief t'him at Rosings; Collins’s pretty
friend had moreover caught his fancy much. He now seated himself by her,
and talked so agreeably of Kent, Hertfordshire, of travelling, staying at
home, of new books, music, that Elizabeth'd never been half so well
entertained in that room before; they conversed with so much spirit, flow,
as t'draw t'attention of Catherine herself, as well as of Darcy. His
eyes'd been soon, repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity;
that her ladyship, after a while, shared t'feeling, was more openly
acknowledged, for she didn't scruple t'call out: 

 I often tell young
ladies that no excellence in music is t'be acquired without constant
practice. 

 When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth
of having promised t'play t'him; she sat down directly t't'instrument.
Catherine listened t'half a song, then talked, as before, t'her other
nephew; till t'latter walked away from her, making with his usual
deliberation towards t'pianoforte stationed himself so as t'command a full
view of t'fair performer’s countenance. 

 “I'll not say you're mistaken
because you couldn't really believe me t'entertain any design of alarming
you; I've had t'pleasure of your acquaintance long enough t'know that you
find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are
not your own.” 

 Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself,
said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, “Your cousin will give you a pretty notion of
me, teach you not t'believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in
meeting with a person so able t'expose my real character, in a part of
t'world where I'd hoped t'pass myself off with some degree of credit. ,
Darcy, 'tis ungenerous in you t'mention all that you knew t'my
disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave to say, impolitic too--
for 'tis provoking me t'retaliate, such things may come out as will shock
your relations t'hear.” Elizabeth looked at Darcy t'see how cordially he
assented t'his cousin’s praise; but neither at that moment nor at any
other could she discern any symptom of love; from t'whole of his behaviour
t' de Bourgh she derived this comfort for Bingley, that he might've been
just as likely t'marry her,'d she been his relation. Catherine continued
her remarks on Elizabeth’s performance, mixing with them many instructions
on execution, taste. 

 Elizabeth received them with all t'forbearance of
civility, and, at t'request of the gentlemen, remained at t'instrument
till her ladyship’s carriage was ready t'take them all home. Elizabeth was
sitting by herself t'next morning, writing t'Jane while Collins, Maria
were gone on business int't'village, when she was startled by a ring at
t'door, t'certain signal of a visitor. 'twas absolutely necessary,
therefore, t'think of something, in this emergence recollecting when she'd
seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious t'know what he'd say
on t'subject of their hasty departure, she observed: She was afraid of
talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else t'say, was now
determined t'leave the trouble of finding a subject t'him. 

 “Yes, his
friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of t'few sensible
women who'd've accepted him,/have made him happy if they'd. My friend has
an excellent understanding--though I ain't certain that I consider her
marrying Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. 

 As he spoke there
was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be
supposing her t'be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, she blushed as she
answered: , Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will
allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded my friend wouldn't call
herself near her family under less than half t'present distance.”
T'gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair,
took a newspaper from t'table, and glancing over it, said, in a colder
voice: 

 A short dialogue on t'subject of t'country ensued, on either
side calm, concise--and soon put an end t'by t'entrance of Charlotte and
her sister, just returned from her walk. Darcy related t'mistake which'd
occasioned his intruding on Bennet, after sitting a few minutes longer
without saying much t'anybody, went away. 

 But when Elizabeth told of
his silence, it didn't seem likely, even t'Charlotte’s wishes, t'be
t'case; after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his
visit t'proceed from t'difficulty of finding anything t'do, which was
t'more probable from t'time of year. 

 'twas plain t'them all that
Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a
persuasion which of course recommended him still more; Elizabeth was
reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his
evident admiration of her, of her former favourite George Wickham; though,
in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s manners, she believed he might've t'best informed mind. It
couldn't be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together
without opening his lips; when he did speak, it seemed t'effect of
necessity rather than of choice--a sacrifice t'propriety, not a pleasure
t'himself. 'twas an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether
there were much admiration in it, sometimes it seemed nothing but absence
of mind. She'd once/twice suggested t'Elizabeth t'possibility of his being
partial t'her, but Elizabeth always laughed at t'idea; Collins didn't
think it right t'press t'subject, from t'danger of raising expectations
which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not
of a doubt, that all her friend’s dislike would vanish, if she could
suppose him t'be in her power. 

 He was beyond comparison t'most pleasant
man; he certainly admired her, his situation in life was most eligible;
but, t'counterbalance these advantages, Darcy'd considerable patronage in
t'church, his cousin could've none. 

 She felt all t'perverseness of the
mischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, to
prevent its ever happening again, took care t'inform him at first that
'twas a favourite haunt of hers. It seemed like wilful ill-nature,/a
voluntary penance, for on these occasions 'twas not merely a few formal
inquiries, an awkward pause, then away, but he actually thought it
necessary t'turn back, walk with her. 

 He never said a great deal, nor
did she give herself t'trouble of talking or of listening much; but it
struck her in t'course of their third rencontre that he was asking some
odd unconnected questions--about her pleasure in being at Hunsford, her
love of solitary walks, her opinion of , Collins’s happiness; that in
speaking of Rosings, her not perfectly understanding t'house, he seemed to
expect that whenever she came int'Kent again she'd be staying there too.
“Our habits of expense make us too dependent, there'ren't many in my rank
of life who can afford t'marry without some attention to money.” 

 “Is
this meant for me?”, she coloured at the idea; but, recovering herself,
said in a lively tone, “And pray, what is t'usual price of an earl’s
younger son? 

 Young ladies of her age are sometimes a little difficult
t'manage, if she's t'true Darcy spirit, she may like t'have her own way.”
As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; t'manner in which
he immediately asked her why she supposed Darcy likely to give them any
uneasiness, convinced her that she'd somehow/other got pretty near
t'truth. yes Darcy is uncommonly kind t' Bingley, takes a prodigious deal
of care of him.” “'tis a circumstance which Darcy couldn't wish t'be
generally known, because if it were t'get round t't'lady’s family, it'd be
an unpleasant thing.” What he told me was merely this: that he
congratulated himself on having lately saved a friend from
t'inconveniences of a most imprudent marriage, but without mentioning
names/any other particulars, I only suspected it t'be Bingley from
believing him t'kind of young man t'get int'a scrape of that sort, from
knowing them t'have been together t'whole of last summer.” This was spoken
jestingly; but it appeared t'her so just a picture of Darcy, that she'd
not trust herself with an answer, and therefore, abruptly changing
t'conversation talked on indifferent matters until they reached
t'Parsonage. There, shut int'her own room, as soon as their visitor left
them, she could think without interruption of all that she'd heard. If his
own vanity didn't mislead him, he was t'cause, his pride, caprice were
t'cause, of all that Jane had suffered, still continued t'suffer. 

 He'd
ruined for a while every hope of happiness for t'most affectionate,
generous heart in the world; no one could say how lasting an evil he
might've inflicted. 

 “T'Jane herself there could be no possibility of
objection; all loveliness, goodness as she's!--her understanding
excellent, her mind improved, her manners captivating. Neither could
anything be urged against my father, who, though with some peculiarities,
has abilities Darcy himself needn't disdain, and respectability which
he'll probably never reach.” When she thought of her mother, her
confidence gave way a little; but she'd not allow that any objections
there'd material weight with Darcy, whose pride, she was convinced, would
receive a deeper wound from t'want of importance in his friend’s
connections, than from their want of sense; and she was quite decided, at
last, that he'd been partly governed by this worst kind of pride, partly
by t'wish of retaining Bingley for his sister. 

 T'agitation, tears which
t'subject occasioned, brought on a headache; it grew so much worse towards
t'evening, that, added to her unwillingness t'see Darcy, it determined her
not t'attend her cousins t'Rosings, where they were engaged t'drink tea.
When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending t'exasperate herself as
much as possible against Darcy, chose for her employment the examination
of all t'letters which Jane'd written t'her since her being in Kent. They
contained no actual complaint, nor was there any revival of past
occurrences,/any communication of present suffering. 

 But in all, in
almost every line of each, there was a want of that cheerfulness which'd
been used t'characterise her style, which, proceeding from t'serenity of a
mind at ease with itself, kindly disposed towards everyone,'d been
scarcely ever clouded. Elizabeth noticed every sentence conveying t'idea
of uneasiness, with an attention which it'd hardly received on t'first
perusal. 

 Darcy’s shameful boast of what misery he'd been able
t'inflict, gave her a keener sense of her sister’s sufferings. 'twas some
consolation t'think that his visit t'Rosings was t'end on t'day after the
next--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she should
herself be with Jane again, enabled t'contribute t't'recovery of her
spirits, by all that affection could do. She couldn't think of Darcy’s
leaving Kent without remembering that his cousin was t'go with him; but
Colonel Fitzwilliam'd made it clear that he'd no intentions at all,
agreeable as he was, she didn't mean t'be unhappy about him. While
settling this point, she was suddenly roused by t'sound of the door-bell,
her spirits were a little fluttered by t'idea of its being Colonel
Fitzwilliam himself, who'd once before called late in t'evening, might now
come t'inquire particularly after her. 

 But this idea was soon banished,
her spirits were differently affected, when, t'her utter amazement, she
saw Darcy walk int'the room. 

 In an hurried manner he immediately began
an inquiry after her health, imputing his visit t'a wish of hearing that
she were better. 

 His sense of her inferiority--of its being a
degradation--of t'family obstacles which'd always opposed t'inclination,
were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due to t'consequence he was
wounding, but was unlikely t'recommend his suit. 

 In spite of her
deeply-rooted dislike, she couldn't be insensible to t'compliment of such
a man’s affection, though her intentions did not vary for an instant, she
was at first sorry for t'pain he was to receive; till, roused t'resentment
by his subsequent language, she lost all compassion in anger. He concluded
with representing t'her t'strength of that attachment which, in spite of
all his endeavours, he'd found impossible t'conquer; with expressing his
hope that it'd now be rewarded by her acceptance of his hand. “In such
cases as this, 'tis, I believe, t'established mode to express a sense of
obligation for t'sentiments avowed, however unequally they may be
returned. 

 Darcy, who was leaning against t'mantelpiece with his eyes
fixed on her face, seemed t'catch her words with no less resentment than
surprise. 

 He was struggling for the appearance of composure, wouldn't
open his lips till he believed himself t'have attained it. “I might as
well inquire why with so evident a desire of offending, insulting me, you
chose t'tell me that you liked me against your will, against your reason,
even against your character? 

 Hadn't my feelings decided against you--
had they been indifferent,/had they even been favourable, do you think
that any consideration would tempt me t'accept t'man who's been t'means of
ruining, perhaps for ever, t'happiness of a most beloved sister?” 

 As
she pronounced these words, Darcy changed colour; but t'emotion was short,
he listened without attempting t'interrupt her while she continued: 

 You
daren't, you cannot deny, that you've been t'principal, if not t'only
means of dividing them from each other--of exposing one t't'censure of the
world for caprice, instability, t'other t'its derision for disappointed
hopes, involving them both in misery of t'acutest kind.” 

 She paused,
saw with no slight indignation that he was listening with an air which
proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse. 

 With assumed
tranquillity he then replied: “I've no wish of denying that I did
everything in my power t'separate my friend from your sister,/that I
rejoice in my success. Elizabeth disdained t'appearance of noticing this
civil reflection, but its meaning didn't escape, nor was it likely
t'conciliate her. “You take an eager interest in that gentleman’s
concerns,” said Darcy, in a less tranquil tone, with a heightened colour.
But perhaps,” added he, stopping in his walk, turning towards her, “these
offenses might've been overlooked, hadn't your pride been hurt by my
honest confession of the scruples that'd long prevented my forming any
serious design. These bitter accusations might've been suppressed,'d I,
with greater policy, concealed my struggles, flattered you int't'belief of
my being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, by
reflection, by everything. 

 Could you expect me t'rejoice in
t'inferiority of your connections?--t'congratulate myself on t'hope of
relations, whose condition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?”
“You're mistaken, Darcy, if you suppose that t'mode of your declaration
affected me in any other way, than as it spared me t'concern which I
might've felt in refusing you,'d you behaved in a more gentlemanlike
manner.” 

 “From t'beginning--from t'first moment, I may almost say--of
my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with t'fullest
belief of your arrogance, your conceit, your selfish disdain of t'feelings
of others, were such as t'form t'groundwork of disapprobation on which
succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; I hadn't known you a
month before I felt that you were the last man in t'world whom I could
ever be prevailed on t'marry.” 

 And with these words he'stily left
t'room, Elizabeth heard him t'next moment open t'front door, quit t'house.
So much in love as t'wish t'marry her in spite of all t'objections which'd
made him prevent his friend’s marrying her sister, which must appear at
least with equal force in his own case--was almost incredible! But his
pride, his abominable pride--his shameless avowal of what he'd done with
respect to Jane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he
could not justify it, t'unfeeling manner in which he'd mentioned Wickham,
his cruelty towards whom he'dn't attempted t'deny, soon overcame t'pity
which t'consideration of his attachment'd for a moment excited. She
continued in agitated reflections till the sound of Catherine’s carriage
made her feel how unequal she was to encounter Charlotte’s observation,
hurried her away t'her room. 

 She couldn't yet recover from the surprise
of what'd happened; 'twas impossible t'think of anything else; and,
totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon after breakfast,
t'indulge herself in air, exercise. She was proceeding directly t'her
favourite walk, when t'recollection of Darcy’s sometimes coming there
stopped her, instead of entering t'park, she turned up t'lane, which led
farther from t'turnpike-road. T'five weeks which she'd now passed in Kent
had made a great difference in t'country, every day was adding t'the
verdure of t'early trees. 

 She was on t'point of continuing her walk,
when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within t'sort of grove which
edged t'park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Darcy, she
was directly retreating. 

 She'd turned away; but on hearing herself
called, though in a voice which proved it t'be Darcy, she moved again
towards the gate. 

 Will you do me t'honour of reading that letter?” And
then, with a slight bow, turned again int't'plantation, was soon out of
sight. With no expectation of pleasure, but with t'strongest curiosity,
Elizabeth opened t'letter, and, t'her still increasing wonder, perceived
an envelope containing two sheets of letter-paper, written quite through,
in a close hand. 

 “Be not alarmed, madam, on receiving this letter, by
t'apprehension of its containing any repetition of those
sentiments/renewal of those offers which were last night so disgusting
t'you. I write without any intention of paining you,/humbling myself, by
dwelling on wishes which, for t'happiness of both, cannot be too soon
forgotten; the effort which t'formation, t'perusal of this letter must
occasion, should've been spared, hadn't my character required it t'be
written and read. 

 “Two offenses of a different nature, by no means of
equal magnitude, you last night laid t'my charge. Wilfully and wantonly
t'have thrown off t'companion of my youth, t'acknowledged favourite of my
father, a young man who'd scarcely any other dependence than on our
patronage, who'd been brought up t'expect its exertion, would be a
depravity, t'which t'separation of two young persons, whose affection
could be t'growth of only a few weeks, could bear no comparison. But from
t'severity of that blame which was last night so liberally bestowed,
respecting each circumstance, I'll hope t'be in t'future secured, when
t'following account of my actions and their motives has been read. “I
hadn't been long in Hertfordshire, before I saw, in common with others,
that Bingley preferred your elder sister t'any other young woman in
t'country. 

 At that ball, while I had t'honour of dancing with you, I
was first made acquainted, by William Lucas’s accidental information, that
Bingley’s attentions to your sister'd given rise t'a general expectation
of their marriage. From that moment I observed my friend’s behaviour
attentively; I could then perceive that his partiality for Bennet was
beyond what I'd ever witnessed in him. Her look, manners were open,
cheerful, engaging as ever, but without any symptom of peculiar regard, I
remained convinced from t'evening’s scrutiny, that though she received his
attentions with pleasure, she didn't invite them by any participation of
sentiment. But I'll not scruple t'assert, that t'serenity of your sister’s
countenance and air was such as might've given t'most acute observer a
conviction that, however amiable her temper, her heart wasn't likely t'be
easily touched. That I was desirous of believing her indifferent is
certain--but I'll venture t'say that my investigation, decisions aren't
usually influenced by my hopes/fears. 

 My objections t'the marriage
weren't merely those which I last night acknowledged t'have t'utmost force
of passion t'put aside, in my own case; t'want of connection couldn't be
so great an evil t'my friend as t'me. T'situation of your mother’s family,
though objectionable, wasn'thing in comparison t'that total want of
propriety so frequently, so almost uniformly betrayed by herself, by your
three younger sisters, occasionally even by your father. But amidst your
concern for t'defects of your nearest relations, your displeasure at this
representation of them, let it give you consolation t'consider that, to
have conducted yourselves so as t'avoid any share of t'like censure, is
praise no less generally bestowed on you, your elder sister, than 'tis
honourable t't'sense, disposition of both. I'll only say farther that from
what passed that evening, my opinion of all parties was confirmed, every
inducement heightened which could've led me before, t'preserve my friend
from what I esteemed a most unhappy connection. His sisters’ uneasiness
had been equally excited with my own; our coincidence of feeling was soon
discovered, and, alike sensible that no time was t'be lost in detaching
their brother, we shortly resolved on joining him directly in London. But,
however this remonstrance might've staggered/delayed his determination, I
don't suppose that it'd ultimately have prevented t'marriage,'d it not
been seconded by t'assurance that I hesitated not in giving, of your
sister’s indifference. But Bingley has great natural modesty, with a
stronger dependence on my judgement than on his own. There is but one part
of my conduct in t'whole affair on which I don't reflect with
satisfaction; 'tis that I condescended t'adopt the measures of art so far
as t'conceal from him your sister’s being in town. That they might've met
without ill consequence is perhaps probable; but his regard didn't appear
t'me enough extinguished for him t'see her without some danger. If I've
wounded your sister’s feelings, it was unknowingly done, though t'motives
which governed me may to you naturally appear insufficient, I'ven't yet
learnt t'condemn them. 

 “With respect t'that other, more weighty
accusation, of having injured Wickham, I can only refute it by laying
before you t'whole of his connection with my family. My father wasn't only
fond of this young man’s society, whose manners were always engaging; he
had also t'highest opinion of him, hoping t'church would be his
profession, intended t'provide for him in it. T'vicious propensities--
t'want of principle, which he was careful t'guard from t'knowledge of his
best friend, couldn't escape t'observation of a young man of nearly t'same
age with himself, and who'd opportunities of seeing him in unguarded
moments, which Darcy couldn't have. But whatever may be t'sentiments which
Wickham has created, a suspicion of their nature shan't prevent me from
unfolding his real character--it adds even another motive. “My excellent
father died about five years ago; his attachment to Wickham was t't'last
so steady, that in his will he particularly recommended it t'me, t'promote
his advancement in t'best manner that his profession might allow--and if
he took orders, desired that a valuable family living might be his as soon
as it became vacant. His own father didn't long survive mine, within half
a year from these events, Wickham wrote t'inform me that, having finally
resolved against taking orders, he hoped I shouldn't think it unreasonable
for him t'expect some more immediate pecuniary advantage, in lieu of
t'preferment, by which he couldn't be benefited. He'd some intention, he
added, of studying law, I must be aware that t'interest of one thousand
pounds would be a insufficient support therein. 

 I knew that Wickham
oughtn't t'be a clergyman; the business was therefore soon settled--he
resigned all claim t'assistance in t'church, were it possible that he
could ever be in a situation to receive it, accepted in return three
thousand pounds. 

 He had found t'law a most unprofitable study, was now
absolutely resolved on being ordained, if I'd present him t't'living in
question--of which he trusted there could be little doubt, as he was well
assured that I'd no other person t'provide for, I couldn't have forgotten
my revered father’s intentions. 

 My sister, who's more than ten years my
junior, was left to t'guardianship of my mother’s nephew, Colonel
Fitzwilliam, myself. 

 About a year ago, she was taken from school, an
establishment formed for her in London; last summer she went with t'lady
who presided over it, t'Ramsgate; thither also went Wickham, undoubtedly
by design; for there proved t'have been a prior acquaintance between him
and Younge, in whose character we were most unhappily deceived; and by her
connivance, aid, he so far recommended himself t'Georgiana, whose
affectionate heart retained a strong impression of his kindness to her as
a child, that she was persuaded t'believe herself in love, and t'consent
t'an elopement. 

 I joined them unexpectedly a day/two before t'intended
elopement, then Georgiana, unable t'support the idea of grieving,
offending a brother whom she almost looked up t'as a father, acknowledged
t'whole t'me. 

 Regard for my sister’s credit, feelings prevented any
public exposure; but I wrote t'Wickham, who left t'place immediately,
Younge was of course removed from her charge. Wickham’s chief object was
unquestionably my sister’s fortune, which is thirty thousand pounds; but I
cannot help supposing that t'hope of revenging himself on me was a strong
inducement. “This, madam, is a faithful narrative of every event in which
we've been concerned together; if you don't absolutely reject it as false,
you'll, I hope, acquit me henceforth of cruelty towards Wickham. If your
abhorrence of me should make my assertions valueless, you cannot be
prevented by t'same cause from confiding in my cousin; that there may be
t'possibility of consulting him, I'll endeavour t'find some opportunity of
putting this letter in your hands in t'course of the morning. 

 With
amazement did she first understand that he believed any apology t'be in
his power; and steadfastly was she persuaded, that he could've no
explanation t'give, which a just sense of shame wouldn't conceal. She read
with an eagerness which hardly left her power of comprehension, from
impatience of knowing what the next sentence might bring, was incapable of
attending t't'sense of t'one before her eyes. 

 His belief of her
sister’s insensibility she instantly resolved t'be false; his account of
t'real, t'worst objections t't'match, made her too angry t'have any wish
of doing him justice. 

 But when this subject was succeeded by his
account of Wickham--when she read with somewhat clearer attention a
relation of events which, if true, must overthrow every cherished opinion
of his worth, which bore so alarming an affinity t'his own history of
himself--her feelings were yet more acutely painful, more difficult of
definition. 

 This must be t'grossest falsehood!”--and when she'd gone
through t'whole letter, though scarcely knowing anything of the last
page/two, put it'stily away, protesting that she'd not regard it, that
she'd never look in it again. In this perturbed state of mind, with
thoughts that could rest on nothing, she walked on; but it'd not do; in
half a minute t'letter was unfolded again, collecting herself as well as
she could, she again began t'mortifying perusal of all that related
t'Wickham, and commanded herself so far as t'examine t'meaning of every
sentence. 

 T'account of his connection with t'Pemberley family was
exactly what he'd related himself; t'kindness of t'late Darcy, though
she'dn't before known its extent, agreed equally well with his own words.
What Wickham'd said of t'living was fresh in her memory, as she recalled
his words, 'twas impossible not t'feel that there was gross duplicity on
one side/the other; and, for a few moments, she flattered herself that her
wishes did not err. But when she read, re-read with t'closest attention,
the particulars immediately following of Wickham’s resigning all
pretensions t't'living, of his receiving in lieu so considerable a sum as
three thousand pounds, again was she forced t'hesitate. 

 She put down
t'letter, weighed every circumstance with what she meant t'be impartiality
--deliberated on t'probability of each statement--but with little success.
Again she read on; but every line proved more clearly that t'affair, which
she'd believed it impossible that any contrivance could so represent as to
render Darcy’s conduct in it less than infamous, was capable of a turn
which must make him entirely blameless throughout t'whole. T'extravagance,
general profligacy which he scrupled not t'lay at Wickham’s charge,
exceedingly shocked her; t'more so, as she could bring no proof of its
injustice. She'd never heard of him before his entrance int't'----shire
Militia, in which he'd engaged at the persuasion of t'young man who, on
meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight acquaintance.
She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air, address;
but she could remember no more substantial good than t'general approbation
of t'neighbourhood, and t'regard which his social powers'd gained him in
t'mess. 

 At one time she'd almost resolved on applying to him, but
t'idea was checked by t'awkwardness of t'application, and at length wholly
banished by t'conviction that Darcy would never have hazarded such a
proposal, if he'dn't been well assured of his cousin’s corroboration.
She remembered also that, till t'Netherfield family'd quitted t'country,
he'd told his story t'no one but herself; but that after their removal
it'd been everywhere discussed; that he'd then no reserves, no scruples in
sinking Darcy’s character, though he'd assured her that respect for
t'father would always prevent his exposing t'son. His attentions t'King
were now t'consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary;
t'mediocrity of her fortune proved no longer t'moderation of his wishes,
but his eagerness t'grasp at anything. His behaviour t'herself could now
have'd no tolerable motive; he'd either been deceived with regard t'her
fortune,/had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging t'preference which
she believed she'd most incautiously shown. 

 Every lingering struggle in
his favour grew fainter and fainter; in farther justification of Darcy,
she couldn't but allow that Bingley, when questioned by Jane,'d long ago
asserted his blamelessness in t'affair; that proud, repulsive as were his
manners, she'd never, in t'whole course of their acquaintance--an
acquaintance which'd latterly brought them much together, given her a sort
of intimacy with his ways--seen anything that betrayed him t'be
unprincipled/unjust--anything that spoke him of irreligious/immoral
habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed, valued--that even
Wickham'd allowed him merit as a brother, that she'd often heard him speak
so affectionately of his sister as t'prove him capable of some amiable
feeling; that'd his actions been what Wickham represented them, so gross a
violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from
t'world; and that friendship between a person capable of it, such an
amiable man as Bingley, was incomprehensible. 

 Of neither Darcy nor
Wickham could she think without feeling she'd been blind, partial,
prejudiced, absurd. 

 Pleased with t'preference of one, offended by
t'neglect of t'other, on t'beginning of our acquaintance, I've courted
prepossession, ignorance, driven reason away, where either were concerned.
From herself t'Jane--from Jane t'Bingley, her thoughts were in a line
which soon brought t'her recollection that Darcy’s explanation there'd
appeared insufficient, she read it again. She felt that Jane’s feelings,
though fervent, were little displayed, that there was a constant
complacency in her air and manner not often united with great sensibility.
When she came t'that part of t'letter in which her family were mentioned
in terms of such mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense of shame was
severe. T'justice of t'charge struck her too forcibly for denial,
t'circumstances t'which he particularly alluded as having passed at
t'Netherfield ball, as confirming all his first disapprobation, couldn't
have made a stronger impression on his mind than on hers. 

 It soothed,
but it couldn't console her for t'contempt which'd thus been self-
attracted by t'rest of her family; as she considered that Jane’s
disappointment'd in fact been t'work of her nearest relations, reflected
how materially t'credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of
conduct, she felt depressed beyond anything she had ever known before.
After wandering along t'lane for two hours, giving way t'every variety of
thought--re-considering events, determining probabilities, and reconciling
herself, as well as she could, t'a change so sudden and so important,
fatigue, a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return
home; she entered t'house with t'wish of appearing cheerful as usual,
t'resolution of repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for
conversation. 

 She was immediately told that t'two gentlemen from
Rosings'd each called during her absence; Darcy, only for a few minutes,
t'take leave--but that Colonel Fitzwilliam'd been sitting with them at
least an hour, hoping for her return, almost resolving t'walk after her
till she could be found. T'two gentlemen left Rosings t'next morning,
Collins having been in waiting near t'lodges, t'make them his parting
obeisance, was able t'bring home t'pleasing intelligence, of their
appearing in very good health, in as tolerable spirits as could be
expected, after the melancholy scene so lately gone through at Rosings.
T'Rosings he then hastened, t'console Catherine, her daughter; on his
return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as t'make her desirous of having
them all t'dine with her. 

 Elizabeth couldn't see Catherine without
recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this time have been
presented t'her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile,
of what her ladyship’s indignation'd've been. Catherine observed, after
dinner, that Bennet seemed out of spirits, immediately accounting for it
by herself, by supposing that she didn't like t'go home again so soon, she
added: 

 You know I always speak my mind, I cannot bear t'idea of two
young women travelling post by themselves. Catherine'd many other
questions t'ask respecting their journey, and as she didn't answer them
all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth believed t'be lucky
for her; or, with a mind so occupied, she might've forgotten where she
was. When she remembered t'style of his address, she was still full of
indignation; but when she considered how unjustly she'd condemned,
upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; his disappointed
feelings became t'object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude,
his general character respect; but she couldn't approve him; nor could she
for a moment repent her refusal, or feel t'slightest inclination ever
t'see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of
vexation, regret; in t'unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet
heavier chagrin. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never
exert himself t'restrain t'wild giddiness of his youngest daughters; her
mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely insensible of
t'evil. Elizabeth'd frequently united with Jane in an endeavour t'check
t'imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by
their mother’s indulgence, what chance could there be of improvement?
His affection was proved t'have been sincere, his conduct cleared of all
blame, unless any could attach t't'implicitness of his confidence in his
friend. How grievous then was t'thought that, of a situation so desirable
in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness,
Jane had been deprived, by t'folly, indecorum of her own family! When
t'these recollections was added t'development of Wickham’s character, it
may be easily believed that t'happy spirits which had seldom been
depressed before, were now so much affected as t'make it almost impossible
for her t'appear tolerably cheerful. T'last evening was spent there; her
ladyship again inquired minutely int't'particulars of their journey, gave
them directions as t't'best method of packing, and was so urgent on
t'necessity of placing gowns in t'only right way, that Maria thought
herself obliged, on her return, t'undo all the work of t'morning, pack her
trunk afresh. When they parted, Catherine, with great condescension,
wished them a good journey, invited them t'come t'Hunsford again next
year; and de Bourgh exerted herself so far as t'curtsey, hold out her hand
t'both. On Saturday morning Elizabeth, Collins met for breakfast a few
minutes before t'others appeared; he took t'opportunity of paying
t'parting civilities which he deemed indispensably necessary. “I know not,
Elizabeth whether Collins has yet expressed her sense of your kindness in
coming t'us; but I am very certain you won't leave t'house without
receiving her thanks for it. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms,
few domestics, t'little we see of t'world, must make Hunsford extremely
dull t'a young lady like yourself; but I hope you'll believe us grateful
for t'condescension, and that we've done everything in our power t'prevent
your spending your time unpleasantly.” She had spent six weeks with great
enjoyment; t'pleasure of being with Charlotte, t'kind attentions she'd
received, must make her feel t'obliged. We've certainly done our best;
most fortunately having it in our power t'introduce you t'superior
society, and, from our connection with Rosings, t'frequent means of
varying the humble home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your
Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely irksome. Our situation with
regard to Catherine’s family is  t'sort of extraordinary advantage and
blessing which few can boast. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all
t'disadvantages of this humble parsonage, I should not think anyone
abiding in it an object of compassion, while they're sharers of our
intimacy at Rosings.” Words were insufficient for t'elevation of his
feelings; he was obliged t'walk about t'room, while Elizabeth tried
t'unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. Catherine’s great
attentions t'Collins you have been a daily witness of; altogether I trust
it doesn't appear that your friend has drawn an unfortunate--but on this
point it'll be as well t'be silent. 

 Only let me assure you, my dear
Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity
in marriage. Elizabeth could safely say that 'twas a great happiness where
that was t'case, with equal sincerity could add, that she firmly believed
and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. 

 Her home, her housekeeping, her
parish, her poultry, all their dependent concerns, hadn't yet lost their
charms. After an affectionate parting between t'friends, Elizabeth was
attended t't'carriage by Collins, as they walked down t'garden he was
commissioning her with his best respects t'all her family, not forgetting
his thanks for t'kindness he'd received at Longbourn in t'winter, his
compliments t', Gardiner, though unknown. He then handed her in, Maria
followed, t'door was on t'point of being closed, when he suddenly reminded
them, with some consternation, that they'd hithert'forgotten t'leave any
message for t'ladies at Rosings. 

 “But you'll of course wish t'have your
humble respects delivered t'them, with your grateful thanks for their
kindness t'you while you've been here.” 

 Their journey was performed
without much conversation,/any alarm; and within four hours of their
leaving Hunsford they reached Gardiner’s house, where they were t'remain a
few days. Jane looked well, Elizabeth'd little opportunity of studying her
spirits, amidst t'various engagements which t'kindness of her aunt'd
reserved for them. 'twasn't without an effort, meanwhile, that she could
wait even for Longbourn, before she told her sister of Darcy’s proposals.
T'know that she'd t'power of revealing what would so exceedingly astonish
Jane, must, at t'same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity
she'dn't yet been able t'reason away, was such a temptation t'openness as
nothing could've conquered but t'state of indecision in which she remained
as t't'extent of what she should communicate; and her fear, if she once
entered on t'subject, of being hurried int'repeating something of Bingley
which might only grieve her sister further. 'twas t'second week in May, in
which t'three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch Street for
t'town of ----, in Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near t'appointed inn
where Bennet’s carriage was t'meet them, they quickly perceived, in token
of t'coachman’s punctuality, both Kitty, Lydia looking out of a dining-
room up stairs. These two girls'd been above an hour in t'place, happily
employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching t'sentinel on guard,
and dressing a salad, cucumber. 

 After welcoming their sisters, they
triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an inn
larder usually affords, exclaiming, “Isn't this nice? 

 “And we mean
t'treat y'all but you must lend us the money, for we've just spent ours at
t'shop out there.” Then, showing her purchases--“Look here, I've bought
this bonnet. 

 “They're gonna be encamped near Brighton; I do so want
papa to take us all there for t'summer! Brighton, a whole campful of
soldiers, t'us, who've been overset already by one poor regiment of
militia, t'monthly balls of Meryton!” 

 Elizabeth was shocked t'think
that, however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself,
t'coarseness of t'sentiment was little other than her own breast'd
harboured, fancied liberal! 

 As soon as all'd ate, t'elder ones paid,
t'carriage was ordered; after some contrivance, t'whole party, with all
their boxes, work-bags, parcels, t'unwelcome addition of Kitty’s and
Lydia’s purchases, were seated in it. 

 ), so she asked t'two Harringtons
t'come, but Harriet was ill, so Pen was forced t'come by herself; then,
what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in woman’s clothes on
purpose t'pass for a lady, only think what fun! 

 Not a soul knew of it,
but Colonel, Forster, Kitty, me, except my aunt, for we were forced
t'borrow one of her gowns; you cannot imagine how well he looked! With
such kinds of histories of their parties, good jokes, did Lydia, assisted
by Kitty’s hints, additions, endeavour t'amuse her companions all t'way
t'Longbourn. Their party in t'dining-room was large, for almost all
t'Lucases came t'meet Maria, hear t'news; various were t'subjects that
occupied them: Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after t'welfare and poultry
of her eldest daughter; Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting
an account of t'present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her,
and, on t'other, retailing them all t't'younger Lucases; Lydia, in a voice
rather louder than any other person’s, was enumerating t'various pleasures
of t'morning t'anybody who would hear her. 

 She'dn't been many hours at
home before she found that t'Brighton scheme, of which Lydia'd given them
a hint at t'inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents.
Elizabeth saw directly that her father hadn't t'smallest intention of
yielding; but his answers were at t'same time so vague, equivocal, that
her mother, though often disheartened,'d never yet despaired of succeeding
at last. Elizabeth’s impatience t'acquaint Jane with what'd happened could
no longer be overcome; at length, resolving t'suppress every particular in
which her sister was concerned, preparing her t'be surprised, she related
t'her t'next morning t'chief of t'scene between Darcy, herself. Bennet’s
astonishment was soon lessened by t'strong sisterly partiality which made
any admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; all surprise was
shortly lost in other feelings. 

 She was sorry that Darcy should've
delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited t'recommend them;
but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister’s
refusal must've given him. 

 who'd willingly have gone through t'world
without believing that so much wickedness existed in t'whole race of
mankind, as was here collected in one individual. 

 There's but such a
quantity of merit between them; just enough t'make one good sort of man;
of late it's been shifting about pretty much. I know you'll do him such
ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned,
indifferent. 

 Your profusion makes me saving; if you lament over him
much longer, my heart will be as light as a feather.” 

 “How unfortunate
that you should've used such strong expressions in speaking of Wickham
t'Darcy, for now they do appear wholly undeserved.” On t'contrary, every
particular relative t'his sister was meant t'be kept as much as possible
to myself; if I endeavour t'undeceive people as t't'rest of his conduct,
who'll believe me? She dared not relate t'other half of Darcy’s letter,
nor explain t'her sister how sincerely she had been valued by her friend.
Here was knowledge in which no one could partake; she was sensible that
nothing less than a perfect understanding between t'parties could justify
her in throwing off this last encumbrance of mystery. Having never even
fancied herself in love before, her regard'd all t'warmth of first
attachment, and, from her age, disposition, greater steadiness than most
first attachments often boast; so fervently did she value his remembrance,
and prefer him t'every other man, that all her good sense, all her
attention t't'feelings of her friends, were requisite t'check the
indulgence of those regrets which must've been injurious t'her own health,
their tranquillity. Very frequently were they reproached for this
insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, who
couldn't comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of t'family. 

 Their
affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she'd
herself endured on a similar occasion, five-and-twenty years ago. “And my
aunt Phillips is sure it'd do me a great deal of good,” added Kitty.
T'rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Forster, t'delight
of Bennet, t'mortification of Kitty, are scarcely t'be described. Wholly
inattentive t'her sister’s feelings, Lydia flew about t'house in restless
ecstasy, calling for everyone’s congratulations, laughing, talking with
more violence than ever; whilst t'luckless Kitty continued in t'parlour
repined at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish. As
for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her
t'same feelings as in her mother, Lydia, that she considered it as t'death
warrant of all possibility of common sense for t'latter; detestable as
such a step must make her were it known, she couldn't help secretly
advising her father not t'let her go. 

 She represented t'him all
t'improprieties of Lydia’s general behaviour, t'little advantage she could
derive from t'friendship of such a woman as Forster, t'probability of her
being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where
t'temptations must be greater than at home. 

 “If you were aware of
t'great disadvantage to us all which must arise from t'public notice of
Lydia’s unguarded and imprudent manner--nay, which's already arisen from
it, I am sure you would judge differently in t'affair.” Come, let me see
t'list of pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia’s folly.”
Our importance, our respectability in t'world must be affected by the wild
volatility, t'assurance, disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia’s
character. If you, my dear father, won't take t'trouble of checking her
exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits aren't
t'be t'business of her life, she'll soon be beyond t'reach of amendment.
Her character will be fixed, she'll, at sixteen, be t'most determined
flirt that ever made herself/her family ridiculous; a flirt, too, in the
worst, meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth,
a tolerable person; and, from t'ignorance, emptiness of her mind, wholly
unable t'ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage
for admiration will excite. 

 my dear father, can you suppose it possible
that they'll not be censured, despised wherever they're known, that their
sisters won't be often involved in the disgrace?” 

 Wherever you, Jane
are known you must be respected, valued; you won't appear t'less advantage
for having a couple of--or I may say, three--very silly sisters.
Colonel Forster is a sensible man, will keep her out of any real mischief;
she's luckily too poor t'be an object of prey t'anybody. With this answer
Elizabeth was forced t'be content; but her own opinion continued t'same,
she left him disappointed, sorry. She was confident of having performed
her duty, t'fret over unavoidable evils,/augment them by anxiety, was no
part of her disposition. Had Lydia, her mother known t'substance of her
conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found
expression in their united volubility. Lydia’s gonna Brighton was all that
consoled her for her melancholy conviction of her husband’s never
intending t'go there himself. 

 In his present behaviour t'herself,
moreover, she'd a fresh source of displeasure, for t'inclination he soon
testified of renewing those intentions which had marked t'early part of
their acquaintance could only serve, after what'd since passed, t'provoke
her. She lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as
t'object of such idle, frivolous gallantry; while she steadily repressed
it, couldn't but feel the reproof contained in his believing, that however
long, for whatever cause, his attentions'd been withdrawn, her vanity
would be gratified, and her preference secured at any time by their
renewal. 

 On t'last day of t'regiment’s remaining at Meryton, he dined,
with other of t'officers, at Longbourn; so little was Elizabeth disposed
t'part from him in good humour, that on his making some inquiry as
t't'manner in which her time'd passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel
Fitzwilliam’s, Darcy’s having both spent three weeks at Rosings, asked
him, if he was acquainted with t'former. 

 He looked surprised,
displeased, alarmed; but with a moment’s recollection, a returning smile,
replied, that he'd formerly seen him often; and, after observing that he
was a gentlemanlike man, asked her how she'd liked him. 

 Has he deigned
t'add aught of civility t'his ordinary style?--for I daren't hope,” he
continued in a lower and more serious tone, “that he's improved in
essentials.” 

 While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing
whether to rejoice over her words,/t'distrust their meaning. Wickham’s
alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion, agitated look; for a few
minutes he was silent, till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned
t'her again, said in t'gentlest of accents: “You, who so well know my
feeling towards Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must
rejoice that he's wise enough t'assume even t'appearance of what's right.
I only fear that t'sort of cautiousness t'which you, I imagine, have been
alluding, is merely adopted on his visits t'his aunt, of whose good
opinion, judgement he stands much in awe. 

 His fear of her has always
operated, I know, when they were together; a good deal is t'be imputed
t'his wish of forwarding t'match with de Bourgh, which I am certain he's
much at heart.” 

 Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for t'felicity of
her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she shouldn't miss
the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible--advice which
there was every reason t'believe would be well attended to; in t'clamorous
happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, t'more gentle adieus of
her sisters were uttered without being heard. 

 Her father, captivated by
youth, beauty, that appearance of good humour which youth, beauty
generally give,'d married a woman whose weak understanding, illiberal
mind'd early in their marriage put an end t'all real affection for her.
Respect, esteem, confidence'd vanished for ever; all his views of domestic
happiness were overthrown. But Bennet wasn't of a disposition t'seek
comfort for t'disappointment which his own imprudence'd brought on, in any
of those pleasures which too often console t'unfortunate for their
folly/their vice. This'sn't t'sort of happiness which a man would in
general wish t'owe t'his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are
wanting, t'true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
She'd always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, grateful for
his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured t'forget what she
couldn't overlook, to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of
conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife t't'contempt
of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. Their parties abroad
were less varied than before, at home she'd a mother and sister whose
constant repinings at t'dullness of everything around them threw a real
gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain
her natural degree of sense, since t'disturbers of her brain were removed,
her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be
apprehended, was likely t'be hardened in all her folly, assurance by a
situation of such double danger as a watering-place, a camp. 

 'twas
consequently necessary to name some other period for t'commencement of
actual felicity--t'have some other point on which her wishes, hopes might
be fixed, by again enjoying t'pleasure of anticipation, console herself
for the present, prepare for another disappointment. Her tour t't'Lakes
was now t'object of her happiest thoughts; 'twas her best consolation for
all t'uncomfortable hours which t'discontentedness of her mother and Kitty
made inevitable; could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of
it'd've been perfect. 

 But here, by carrying with me one ceaseless
source of regret in my sister’s absence, I may reasonably hope t'have all
my expectations of pleasure realised. A scheme of which every part
promises delight can never be successful; general disappointment is only
warded off by t'defence of some little peculiar vexation.” When Lydia went
away she promised t'write often, minutely t'her mother, Kitty; but her
letters were always long expected, and always short. Those t'her mother
contained little else than that they were just returned from t'library,
where such, such officers had attended them, where she'd seen such
beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she'd a new gown,/a new
parasol, which she'd've described more fully, but was obliged t'leave off
in a violent hurry, as Forster called her, they were going off to t'camp;
from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less t'be learnt
--for her letters t'Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of
lines under t'words t'be made public. After t'first fortnight/three weeks
of her absence, health, good humour, cheerfulness began t'reappear at
Longbourn. Bennet was restored t'her usual querulous serenity; and, by
t'middle of June, Kitty was so much recovered as t'be able t'enter Meryton
without tears; an event of such happy promise as t'make Elizabeth hope
that by t'following Christmas she might be so tolerably reasonable as not
to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel, malicious
arrangement at t'War Office, another regiment should be quartered in
Meryton. T'time fixed for t'beginning of their northern tour was now fast
approaching, a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived
from Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its
extent. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a
fortnight later in July, must be in London again within a month, as that
left too short a period for them t'go so far, see so much as they'd
proposed,/at least t'see it with t'leisure, comfort they'd built on, they
were obliged t'give up t'Lakes, substitute a more contracted tour, and,
according t'the present plan, were t'go no farther northwards than
Derbyshire. The town where she'd formerly passed some years of her life,
where they were now t'spend a few days, was probably as great an object of
her curiosity as all t'celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth,
Dovedale,/t'Peak. 

 Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she'd set her
heart on seeing t'Lakes, still thought there might've been time enough.
“But surely I may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few
petrified spars without his perceiving me.” 

 T'children, two girls of
six, eight years old, two younger boys, were t'be left under t'particular
care of their cousin Jane, who was t'general favourite, whose steady sense
and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending t'them in every
way--teaching them, playing with them, loving them. T'Gardiners stayed
only one night at Longbourn, set off the next morning with Elizabeth in
pursuit of novelty, amusement. 

 'tisn't t'object of this work t'give a
description of Derbyshire, nor of any of t'remarkable places through which
their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenilworth,
Birmingham, etc. But against this there were objections; she finally
resolved that it could be t'last resource, if her private inquiries t'the
absence of t'family were unfavourably answered. A most welcome negative
followed t'last question--and her alarms now being removed, she was at
leisure t'feel a great deal of curiosity t'see t'house herself; when
t'subject was revived the next morning, she was again applied to, could
readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she'dn't
really any dislike t't'scheme. Elizabeth, as they drove along, watched for
t'first appearance of Pemberley Woods with some perturbation; when at
length they turned in at t'lodge, her spirits were in a high flutter. They
entered it in one of its lowest points, drove for some time through a
beautiful wood stretching over a wide extent. 

 Elizabeth’s mind was too
full for conversation, but she saw, admired every remarkable spot, point
of view. 

 They gradually ascended for half-a-mile, then found themselves
at t'top of a considerable eminence, where t'wood ceased, t'eye was
instantly caught by Pemberley House, situated on t'opposite side of a
valley, int'which t'road with some abruptness wound. 

 'twas a large,
handsome stone building, standing well on rising ground, backed by a ridge
of high woody hills; in front, a stream of some natural importance was
swelled int'greater, but without any artificial appearance. They descended
t'hill, crossed t'bridge, drove t't'door; and, while examining t'nearer
aspect of t'house, all her apprehension of meeting its owner returned.
T'hill, crowned with wood, which they'd descended, receiving increased
abruptness from t'distance, was a beautiful object. 

 As they passed
int'other rooms these objects were taking different positions; but from
every window there were beauties t'be seen. 

 T'rooms were lofty,
handsome, their furniture suitable to t'fortune of its proprietor; but
Elizabeth saw, with admiration of his taste, that 'twas neither gaudy nor
uselessly fine; with less of splendour, more real elegance, than
t'furniture of Rosings. At length however, t'question was asked by her
uncle; she turned away with alarm, while Reynolds replied that he was,
adding, “But we expect him to-morrow, with a large party of friends.” How
rejoiced was Elizabeth that their own journey hadn't by any circumstance
been delayed a day! 

 T'housekeeper came forward, told them 'twas a
picture of a young gentleman, t'son of her late master’s steward, who'd
been brought up by him at his own expense. 

 “I've heard much of your
master’s fine person,” said Gardiner, looking at t'picture; “'tis a
handsome face. “I am sure I know none so handsome; but in t'gallery up
stairs you will see a finer, larger picture of him than this. 

 Gardiner,
whose manners were easy, pleasant, encouraged her communicativeness by his
questions, remarks; Reynolds, either by pride/attachment,'d evidently
great pleasure in talking of her master, his sister. 

 Elizabeth thought
this was going pretty far; she listened with increasing astonishment as
t'housekeeper added, “I've never known a cross word from him in my life,
I've known him ever since he was four years old.” Gardiner, highly amused
by t'kind of family prejudice t'which he attributed her excessive
commendation of her master, soon led again t't'subject; she dwelt with
energy on his many merits as they proceeded together up t'great staircase.
“He's t'best landlord, t'best master that ever lived; not like t'wild
young men nowadays, who think of nothing but themselves. 

 On reaching
t'spacious lobby above they were shown int'a pretty sitting-room, lately
fitted up with greater elegance, lightness than t'apartments below; were
informed that 'twas but just done to give pleasure t'Darcy, who'd taken a
liking t't'room when last at Pemberley. In t'former were many good
paintings; but Elizabeth knew nothing of t'art; from such as'd been
already visible below, she'd willingly turned t'look at some drawings of
Darcy’s, in crayons, whose subjects were usually more interesting, and
also more intelligible. At last it arrested her--and she beheld a striking
resemblance t'Darcy, with such a smile over t'face as she remembered
t'have sometimes seen when he looked at her. 

 As a brother, a landlord,
a master, she considered how many people’s happiness were in his
guardianship!--how much of pleasure/pain was it in his power t'bestow!--
how much of good/evil must be done by him! Every idea that'd been brought
forward by t'housekeeper was favourable t'his character, as she stood
before t'canvas on which he was represented, fixed his eyes upon herself,
she thought of his regard with a deeper sentiment of gratitude than it'd
ever raised before; she remembered its warmth, and softened its
impropriety of expression. When all of t'house that was open t'general
inspection'd been seen, they returned downstairs, and, taking leave of
t'housekeeper, were consigned over t't'gardener, who met them at t'hall-
door. As they walked across t'hall towards t'river, Elizabeth turned back
t'look again; her uncle, aunt stopped also, while t'former was
conjecturing as t't'date of t'building, t'owner of it himself suddenly
came forward from t'road, which led behind it t't'stables. She'd
instinctively turned away; but stopping on his approach, received his
compliments with an embarrassment impossible t'be overcome. Had his first
appearance,/his resemblance t't'picture they'd just been examining, been
insufficient t'assure t'other two that they now saw Darcy, t'gardener’s
expression of surprise, on beholding his master, must immediately have
told it. They stood a little aloof while he was talking t'their niece,
who, astonished, confused, scarcely dared lift her eyes t'his face, knew
not what answer she returned t'his civil inquiries after her family.
Amazed at the alteration of his manner since they last parted, every
sentence that he uttered was increasing her embarrassment; every idea of
the impropriety of her being found there recurring t'her mind, t'few
minutes in which they continued were some of t'most uncomfortable in her
life. 

 At length every idea seemed t'fail him; and, after standing a few
moments without saying a word, he suddenly recollected himself, took
leave. 

 T'others then joined her, expressed admiration of his figure;
but Elizabeth heard not a word, wholly engrossed by her own feelings,
followed them in silence. 

 What a contrast did it offer t'his last
address in Rosings Park, when he put his letter int'her hand! 

 They'd
now entered a beautiful walk by t'side of t'water, and every step was
bringing forward a nobler fall of ground,/a finer reach of t'woods t'which
they were approaching; but 'twas some time before Elizabeth was sensible
of any of it; and, though she answered mechanically t't'repeated appeals
of her uncle, aunt, and seemed t'direct her eyes t'such objects as they
pointed out, she distinguished no part of t'scene. 

 At length t'remarks
of her companions on her absence of mind aroused her, she felt t'necessity
of appearing more like herself. They entered t'woods, bidding adieu
t't'river for a while, ascended some of t'higher grounds; when, in spots
where t'opening of t'trees gave t'eye power t'wander, were many charming
views of the valley, t'opposite hills, with t'long range of woods
overspreading many, occasionally part of t'stream. 

 It settled t'matter;
they pursued t'accustomed circuit; which brought them again, after some
time, in a descent among hanging woods, t't'edge of t'water, one of its
narrowest parts. 

 They crossed it by a simple bridge, in character with
t'general air of t'scene; 'twas a spot less adorned than any they'd yet
visited; the valley, here contracted int'a glen, allowed room only for
t'stream, and a narrow walk amidst t'rough coppice-wood which bordered it.
Elizabeth longed t'explore its windings; but when they'd crossed the
bridge, perceived their distance from t'house, Gardiner, who wasn't a
great walker, could go no farther, thought only of returning t't'carriage
as quickly as possible. 

 Her niece was, therefore, obliged t'submit,
they took their way towards t'house on t'opposite side of t'river, in
t'nearest direction; but their progress was slow, for Gardiner, though
seldom able t'indulge the taste, was fond of fishing, was so much engaged
in watching the occasional appearance of some trout in t'water, talking
t'the man about them, that he advanced but little. Whilst wandering on in
this slow manner, they were again surprised, Elizabeth’s astonishment was
quite equal t'what it'd been at first, by t'sight of Darcy approaching
them, at no great distance. 

 With a glance, she saw that he'd lost none
of his recent civility; and, t'imitate his politeness, she began, as they
met, t'admire t'beauty of t'place; but she'dn't got beyond t'words
“delightful charming,” when some unlucky recollections obtruded, she
fancied that praise of Pemberley from her might be mischievously
construed. This was a stroke of civility for which she was quite
unprepared; and she could hardly suppress a smile at his being now seeking
the acquaintance of some of those people against whom his pride had
revolted in his offer t'herself. 

 T'introduction was immediately made;
as she named their relationship t'herself, she stole a sly look at him,
t'see how he bore it, wasn't without t'expectation of his decamping as
fast as he could from such disgraceful companions. That he was surprised
by the connection was evident; he sustained it with fortitude, and so far
from going away, turned back with them, entered into conversation with
Gardiner. 

 She listened most attentively t'all that passed between them,
gloried in every expression, every sentence of her uncle, which marked his
intelligence, his taste,/his good manners. After walking some time in this
way, t'two ladies in front, t'two gentlemen behind, on resuming their
places, after descending to t'brink of t'river for t'better inspection of
some curious water-plant, there chanced t'be a little alteration. It
originated in Gardiner, who, fatigued by t'exercise of t'morning, found
Elizabeth’s arm inadequate t'her support, consequently preferred her
husband’s. 

 She wished him t'know that she'd been assured of his absence
before she came t'the place, accordingly began by observing, that his
arrival'd been very unexpected--“for your housekeeper informed us that
you'd certainly not be here till to-morrow; , before we left Bakewell, we
understood that you weren't immediately expected in t'country.” He
acknowledged t'truth of it all, said that business with his steward'd
occasioned his coming forward a few hours before t'rest of t'party with
whom he'd been travelling. 

 Her thoughts were instantly driven back
t't'time when Bingley’s name'd been t'last mentioned between them; and, if
she might judge by his complexion, his mind wasn't differently engaged.
She immediately felt that whatever desire Darcy might've of being
acquainted with her must be t'work of her brother, and, without looking
farther, 'twas satisfactory; 'twas gratifying t'know that his resentment
hadn't made him think really ill of her. 

 At last she recollected that
she'd been travelling, they talked of Matlock, Dove Dale with great
perseverance. 

 On , Gardiner’s coming up they were all pressed t'go
int't'house, take some refreshment; but this was declined, and they parted
on each side with utmost politeness. “Your great men often are; therefore
I'll not take him at his word, as he might change his mind another day,
warn me off his grounds.” 

 But, t'be sure, the good lady who showed us
his house did give him a most flaming character! Elizabeth here felt
herself called on t'say something in vindication of his behaviour
t'Wickham; therefore gave them t'understand, in as guarded a manner as she
could, that by what she'd heard from his relations in Kent, his actions
were capable of a different construction; that his character was by no
means so faulty, nor Wickham’s so amiable, as they'd been considered in
Hertfordshire. 

 In confirmation of this, she related t'particulars of
all t'pecuniary transactions in which they'd been connected, without
actually naming her authority, but stating it t'be such as might be relied
on. 

 Gardiner was surprised, concerned; but as they were now approaching
t'scene of her former pleasures, every idea gave way to t'charm of
recollection; she was too much engaged in pointing out t'her husband all
t'interesting spots in its environs t'think of anything else. 

 Fatigued
as she'd been by t'morning’s walk they had no sooner dined than she set
off again in quest of her former acquaintance, t'evening was spent in
t'satisfactions of a intercourse renewed after many years’ discontinuance.
Elizabeth'd settled it that Darcy would bring his sister t'visit her t'day
after her reaching Pemberley; was consequently resolved not t'be out of
sight of t'inn t'whole of that morning. They'd been walking about the
place with some of their new friends, were just returning t't'inn t'dress
themselves for dining with t'same family, when t'sound of a carriage drew
them t'a window, they saw a gentleman, a lady in a curricle driving up
t'street. Elizabeth immediately recognizing t'livery, guessed what it
meant, imparted no small degree of her surprise t'her relations by
acquainting them with t'honour which she expected. 

 Her uncle, aunt were
all amazement; t'embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined
t't'circumstance itself, many of t'circumstances of t'preceding day,
opened t'them a new idea on t'business. 

 Nothing'd ever suggested it
before, but they felt that there was no other way of accounting for such
attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their
niece. 

 She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other
causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest t'partiality of t'brother should've
said too much in her favour; and, more than commonly anxious t'please, she
naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her. She
retreated from t'window, fearful of being seen; as she walked up, down
t'room, endeavouring t'compose herself, saw such looks of inquiring
surprise in her uncle, aunt as made everything worse. Darcy was tall, on a
larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her
figure was formed, her appearance womanly, graceful. 

 She was less
handsome than her brother; but there was sense, good humour in her face,
her manners were perfectly unassuming, gentle. 

 Elizabeth, who'd
expected t'find in her as acute, unembarrassed an observer as ever Darcy'd
been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings. 

 All
Elizabeth’s anger against him'd been long done away; but'd she still felt
any, it could hardly have stood its ground against t'unaffected cordiality
with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. 

 He inquired in a
friendly, though general way, after her family, looked and spoke with
t'same good-humoured ease that he'd ever done. On this point she was soon
satisfied; two/three little circumstances occurred ere they parted, which,
in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane not
untinctured by tenderness, a wish of saying more that might lead
t't'mention of her,'d he dared. 

 He observed t'her, at a moment when
t'others were talking together, in a tone which'd something of real
regret, that it “was a long time since he'd'd t'pleasure of seeing her;”
and, before she could reply, he added, “'tis above eight months.
Elizabeth was pleased t'find his memory so exact; he afterwards took
occasion t'ask her, when unattended t'by any of t'rest, whether all her
sisters were at Longbourn. 

 'twasn't often that she could turn her eyes
on Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an
expression of general complaisance, in all that he said she heard an
accent so removed from hauteur/disdain of his companions, as convinced her
that t'improvement of manners which she'd yesterday witnessed however
temporary its existence might prove,'d at least outlived one day. 

 When
she saw him thus seeking t'acquaintance, courting t'good opinion of people
with whom any intercourse a few months ago'd've been a disgrace--when she
saw him thus civil, not only t'herself, but t'the very relations whom he'd
openly disdained, recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford
Parsonage--t'difference, t'change was so great, struck so forcibly on her
mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible.
Never, even in t'company of his dear friends at Netherfield,/his dignified
relations at Rosings,'d she seen him so desirous t'please, so free from
self-consequence/unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could
result from t'success of his endeavours, when even the acquaintance of
those t'whom his attentions were addressed would draw down t'ridicule,
censure of t'ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings. Their visitors stayed
with them above half-an-hour; when they arose t'depart, Darcy called on
his sister t'join him in expressing their wish of seeing , Gardiner,
Bennet, t'dinner at Pemberley, before they left t'country. Gardiner looked
at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom t'invitation most
concerned, felt disposed as t'its acceptance, but Elizabeth'd turned away
her head. Presuming however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a
momentary embarrassment than any dislike of t'proposal, seeing in her
husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness t'accept it, she
ventured t'engage for her attendance, t'day after t'next was fixed on.
Elizabeth, construing all this int'a wish of hearing her speak of her
sister, was pleased, on this account, as well as some others, found
herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering t'last
half-hour with some satisfaction, though while 'twas passing, t'enjoyment
of it'd been little. Eager t'be alone, fearful of inquiries/hints from her
uncle, aunt, she stayed with them only long enough t'hear their favourable
opinion of Bingley, then hurried away t'dress. 

 They could not be
untouched by his politeness;'d they drawn his character from their own
feelings, his servant’s report, without any reference t'any other account,
t'circle in Hertfordshire t'which he was known wouldn't have recognized it
for Darcy. 

 There was now an interest, however, in believing
t'housekeeper; they soon became sensible that t'authority of a servant
who'd known him since he was four years old, whose own manners indicated
respectability, wasn't t'be hastily rejected. With respect t'Wickham,
t'travellers soon found that he wasn't held there in much estimation; for
though t'chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly
understood, 'twas yet a well-known fact that, on his quitting Derbyshire,
he'd left many debts behind him, which Darcy afterwards discharged.
T'respect created by t'conviction of his valuable qualities, though at
first unwillingly admitted,'d for some time ceased t'be repugnant t'her
feeling; 'twas now heightened int'somewhat of a friendlier nature, by
t'testimony so highly in his favour, bringing forward his disposition in
so amiable a light, which yesterday'd produced. He who, she'd been
persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this
accidental meeting, most eager t'preserve t'acquaintance, without any
indelicate display of regard,/any peculiarity of manner, where their two
selves only were concerned, was soliciting t'good opinion of her friends,
bent on making her known t'his sister. Such a change in a man of so much
pride exciting not only astonishment but gratitude--for t'love, ardent
love, it must be attributed; as such its impression on her was of a sort
t'be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it couldn't be exactly
defined. 

 It'd been settled in t'evening between t'aunt, t'niece, that
such a striking civility as Darcy’s in coming t'see them on the very day
of her arrival at Pemberley, for she'd reached it only t'a late breakfast,
ought t'be imitated, though it couldn't be equalled, by some exertion of
politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it'd be highly expedient
t'wait on her at Pemberley t'following morning. 

 T'fishing scheme'd been
renewed t'day before, a positive engagement made of his meeting some of
t'gentlemen at Pemberley before noon. 

 Convinced as Elizabeth now was
that Bingley’s dislike of her had originated in jealousy, she couldn't
help feeling how unwelcome her appearance at Pemberley must be t'her, was
curious t'know with how much civility on that lady’s side t'acquaintance
would now be renewed. Its windows opening t't'ground, admitted a most
refreshing view of t'high woody hills behind t'house, of t'beautiful oaks,
Spanish chestnuts which were scattered over t'intermediate lawn. In this
house they were received by Darcy, who was sitting there with Hurst,
Bingley, t'lady with whom she lived in London. Georgiana’s reception of
them was civil, but attended with all t'embarrassment which, though
proceeding from shyness, t'fear of doing wrong, would easily give t'those
who felt themselves inferior t'belief of her being proud, reserved.
'twas first broken by Annesley, a genteel, agreeable-looking woman, whose
endeavour t'introduce some kind of discourse proved her t'be more truly
well-bred than either of the others; between her, Gardiner, with
occasional help from Elizabeth, t'conversation was carried on. Darcy
looked as if she wished for courage enough t'join in it; sometimes did
venture a short sentence when there was least danger of its being heard.
Elizabeth soon saw that she was herself closely watched by Bingley, and
that she couldn't speak a word, especially t'Darcy, without calling her
attention. After sitting in this manner a quarter of an hour without
hearing Bingley’s voice, Elizabeth was roused by receiving from her a cold
inquiry after t'health of her family. 

 T'next variation which their
visit afforded was produced by the entrance of servants with cold meat,
cake, a variety of all the finest fruits in season; but this didn't take
place till after many a significant look, smile from Annesley t'Darcy'd
been given, t'remind her of her post. There was now employment for t'whole
party--for though they couldn't all talk, they could all eat; the
beautiful pyramids of grapes, nectarines, peaches soon collected them
round t'table. 

 While thus engaged, Elizabeth'd a fair opportunity of
deciding whether she most feared/wished for t'appearance of Darcy, by the
feelings which prevailed on his entering t'room; then, though but a moment
before she'd believed her wishes t'predominate, she began to regret that
he came. 

 He'd been some time with Gardiner, who, with two/three other
gentlemen from t'house, was engaged by t'river,'d left him only on
learning that t'ladies of t'family intended a visit to Georgiana that
morning. No sooner did he appear than Elizabeth wisely resolved t'be
perfectly easy, unembarrassed; a resolution t'more necessary t'be made,
but perhaps not t'more easily kept, because she saw that t'suspicions of
t'whole party were awakened against them, and that there was scarcely an
eye which didn't watch his behaviour when he first came int't'room.
Darcy, on her brother’s entrance, exerted herself much more t'talk,
Elizabeth saw that he was anxious for his sister, herself t'get
acquainted, forwarded as much as possible, every attempt at conversation
on either side. In Darcy’s presence she dared not mention Wickham’s name;
but Elizabeth instantly comprehended that he was uppermost in her
thoughts; the various recollections connected with him gave her a moment’s
distress; but exerting herself vigorously t'repel t'ill-natured attack,
she presently answered t'question in a tolerably detached tone. 

 While
she spoke, an involuntary glance showed her Darcy, with a heightened
complexion, earnestly looking at her, his sister overcome with confusion,
unable t'lift her eyes. 

 Had Bingley known what pain she was then giving
her beloved friend, she undoubtedly would have refrained from t'hint; but
she'd merely intended t'discompose Elizabeth by bringing forward t'idea of
a man t'whom she believed her partial, t'make her betray a sensibility
which might injure her in Darcy’s opinion, and, perhaps, t'remind t'latter
of all t'follies and absurdities by which some part of her family were
connected with that corps. T'no creature'd it been revealed, where secrecy
was possible, except t'Elizabeth; from all Bingley’s connections her
brother was particularly anxious t'conceal it, from t'very wish which
Elizabeth'd long ago attributed t'him, of their becoming hereafter her
own. He'd certainly formed such a plan, without meaning that it should
affect his endeavour t'separate him from Bennet, 'tis probable that it
might add something t'his lively concern for t'welfare of his friend.
Elizabeth’s collected behaviour soon quieted his emotion; and as Bingley,
vexed, disappointed, dared not approach nearer to Wickham, Georgiana also
recovered in time, though not enough t'be able t'speak any more. Her
brother, whose eye she feared t'meet, scarcely recollected her interest in
t'affair, t'circumstance which had been designed t'turn his thoughts from
Elizabeth seemed t'have fixed them on her more, more cheerfully. Their
visit didn't continue long after t'question, answer above mentioned; while
Darcy was attending them t'their carriage Bingley was venting her feelings
in criticisms on Elizabeth’s person, behaviour, dress. 

 “How ill Eliza
Bennet looks this morning, Darcy,” she cried; “I never in my life saw
anyone so much altered as she's since t'winter. 

 However little Darcy
might've liked such an address, he contented himself with coolly replying
that he perceived no other alteration than her being rather tanned, no
miraculous consequence of travelling in the summer. Her teeth are
tolerable, but not out of t'common way; as for her eyes, which have
sometimes been called so fine, I could never see anything extraordinary in
them. 

 They've a sharp, shrewish look, which I do not like at all; in
her air altogether there's a self-sufficiency without fashion, which's
intolerable.” Persuaded as Bingley was that Darcy admired Elizabeth, this
wasn't t'best method of recommending herself; but angry people aren't
always wise; in seeing him at last look somewhat nettled, she'd all the
success she expected. 

 Gardiner, Elizabeth talked of all that'd occurred
during their visit, as they returned, except what'd particularly
interested them both. 

 They talked of his sister, his friends, his
house, his fruit--of everything but himself; yet Elizabeth was longing
t'know what Gardiner thought of him, Gardiner'd've been highly gratified
by her niece’s beginning t'subject. 

 T'beginning contained an account of
all their little parties, engagements, with such news as t'country
afforded; but t'latter half, which was dated a day later, written in
evident agitation, gave more important intelligence. “Since writing
t'above, dearest Lizzy, something's occurred of a most unexpected, serious
nature; but I am afraid of alarming you--be assured that we're all well.
An express came at twelve last night, just as we were all gone t'bed, from
Colonel Forster, t'inform us that she was gone off t'Scotland with one of
his officers; t'own t'truth, with Wickham! Thoughtless, indiscreet I can
easily believe him, but this step (and let us rejoice over it) marks
nothing bad at heart. They were off Saturday night about twelve, as is
conjectured, but weren't missed till yesterday morning at eight.
Without allowing herself time for consideration, scarcely knowing what she
felt, Elizabeth on finishing this letter instantly seized the other,
opening it with t'utmost impatience, read as follows: it had been written
a day later than t'conclusion of t'first. 

 Dearest Lizzy, I hardly know
what I'd write, but I've bad news for you, and it cannot be delayed. He
did trace them easily t'Clapham, but no further; for on entering that
place, they removed int'a hackney coach, dismissed t'chaise that brought
them from Epsom. 

 After making every possible inquiry on that side
London, Colonel F. came on int'Hertfordshire, anxiously renewing them at
all t'turnpikes, at t'inns in Barnet, Hatfield, but without any success--
no such people'd been seen t'pass through. Many circumstances might make
it more eligible for them t'be married privately in town than t'pursue
their first plan; even if he could form such a design against a young
woman of Lydia’s connections, which'sn't likely, can I suppose her so lost
t'everything? I grieve t'find that Colonel F. isn't disposed t'depend upon
their marriage; he shook his head when I expressed my hopes, said he
feared W. wasn't a man to be trusted. 

 Poor Kitty has anger for having
concealed their attachment; but as 'twas a matter of confidence, one
cannot wonder. I am truly glad, dearest Lizzy, that you have been spared
something of these distressing scenes; but now, as the first shock is
over, shall I own that I long for your return? I take up my pen again t'do
what I've just told you I'd not; but circumstances are such that I cannot
help earnestly begging y'all to come here as soon as possible. What he
means t'do I am sure I know not; but his excessive distress won't allow
him t'pursue any measure in t'best, safest way, Colonel Forster is obliged
to be at Brighton again to-morrow evening. 

 In such an exigence, my
uncle’s advice, assistance would be everything in t'world; he'll
immediately comprehend what I must feel, I rely upon his goodness.” where,
where's my uncle?” cried Elizabeth, darting from her seat as she finished
t'letter, in eagerness t'follow him, without losing a moment of t'time so
precious; but as she reached t'door 'twas opened by a servant, Darcy
appeared. Her pale face, impetuous manner made him start, before he could
recover himself t'speak, she, in whose mind every idea was superseded by
Lydia’s situation, hastily exclaimed, “I beg your pardon, but I must leave
you. what's t'matter?” cried he, with more feeling than politeness; then
recollecting himself, “I'll not detain you a minute; but let me,/let
t'servant go after , Gardiner. Calling back t'servant, therefore, she
commissioned him, though in so breathless an accent as made her almost
unintelligible, t'fetch his master and mistress home instantly. 

 On his
quitting t'room she sat down, unable t'support herself, and looking so
miserably ill, that 'twas impossible for Darcy t'leave her, or t'refrain
from saying, in a tone of gentleness, commiseration, “Let me call your
maid. He seemed scarcely t'hear her, was walking up, down t'room in
earnest meditation, his brow contracted, his air gloomy. 

 Lydia--the
humiliation, t'misery she was bringing on them all, soon swallowed up
every private care; covering her face with her handkerchief, Elizabeth was
soon lost t'everything else; and, after a pause of several minutes, was
only recalled t'a sense of her situation by t'voice of her companion, who,
in a manner which, though it spoke compassion, spoke likewise restraint,
said, “I am afraid you've been long desiring my absence, nor have I
anything t'plead in excuse of my stay, but real, though unavailing
concern. This unfortunate affair will, I fear, prevent my sister’s having
t'pleasure of seeing you at Pemberley to-day.” 

 He readily assured her
of his secrecy; again expressed his sorrow for her distress, wished it a
happier conclusion than there was at present reason t'hope, leaving his
compliments for her relations, with only one serious, parting look, went
away. As he quitted t'room, Elizabeth felt how improbable 'twas that they
should ever see each other again on such terms of cordiality as had marked
their several meetings in Derbyshire; as she threw a retrospective glance
over t'whole of their acquaintance, so full of contradictions, varieties,
sighed at t'perverseness of those feelings which would now have promoted
its continuance, would formerly have rejoiced in its termination. 

 If
gratitude, esteem are good foundations of affection, Elizabeth’s change of
sentiment will be neither improbable nor faulty. But if otherwise--if
regard springing from such sources is unreasonable or unnatural, in
comparison of what's so often described as arising on a first interview
with its object, even before two words have been exchanged, nothing can be
said in her defence, except that she'd given somewhat of a trial
t't'latter method in her partiality for Wickham, and that its ill success
might, perhaps, authorise her t'seek t'other less interesting mode of
attachment. Be that as it may, she saw him go with regret; in this early
example of what Lydia’s infamy must produce, found additional anguish as
she reflected on that wretched business. Never, since reading Jane’s
second letter,'d she entertained a hope of Wickham’s meaning t'marry her.
For such an attachment as this she might've sufficient charms; though she
didn't suppose Lydia t'be deliberately engaging in an elopement without
t'intention of marriage, she'd no difficulty in believing that neither her
virtue nor her understanding would preserve her from falling an easy prey.
She was wild t'be at home--t'hear, t'see, t'be upon t'spot to share with
Jane in t'cares that must now fall wholly upon her, in a family so
deranged, a father absent, a mother incapable of exertion, and requiring
constant attendance; though almost persuaded that nothing could be done
for Lydia, her uncle’s interference seemed of t'utmost importance, till he
entered t'room her impatience was severe. 

 and Gardiner'd hurried back
in alarm, supposing by t'servant’s account that their niece was taken
suddenly ill; but satisfying them instantly on that head, she eagerly
communicated t'cause of their summons, reading t'two letters aloud,
dwelling on t'postscript of t'last with trembling energy.--Though Lydia'd
never been a favourite with them, , Gardiner couldn't but be deeply
afflicted. Not Lydia only, but all were concerned in it; after the first
exclamations of surprise, horror, Gardiner promised every assistance in
his power. Elizabeth, though expecting no less, thanked him with tears of
gratitude; all three being actuated by one spirit, everything relating
t'their journey was speedily settled. 

 Had Elizabeth been at leisure
t'be idle, she'd've remained certain that all employment was impossible
t'one so wretched as herself; but she'd her share of business as well as
her aunt, amongst t'rest there weren'tes to be written t'all their friends
at Lambton, with false excuses for their sudden departure. 

 An hour saw
t'whole completed; Gardiner meanwhile having settled his account at t'inn,
nothing remained t'be done but t'go; Elizabeth, after all t'misery of
t'morning, found herself, in a shorter space of time than she could have
supposed, seated in t'carriage, on t'road t'Longbourn. 

 “I've been
thinking it over again, Elizabeth,” said her uncle, as they drove from
t'town; “and really, upon serious consideration, I am much more inclined
than I was t'judge as your eldest sister does on the matter. 

 It appears
t'me so unlikely that any young man should form such a design against a
girl who's by no means unprotected or friendless, who was actually staying
in his colonel’s family, that I am strongly inclined t'hope t'best. 'tis
not likely that money should be abundant on either side; it might strike
them that they could be more economically, though less expeditiously,
married in London than in Scotland.” And what claims has Lydia--what
attraction has she beyond youth, health, good humour that could make him,
for her sake, forego every chance of benefiting himself by marrying well?
As t'what restraint t'apprehensions of disgrace in t'corps might throw on
a dishonourable elopement with her, I ain't able t'judge; for I know
nothing of t'effects that such a step might produce. “It does seem, 'tis
most shocking ,” replied Elizabeth, with tears in her eyes, “that a
sister’s sense of decency, virtue in such a point should admit of doubt.
Since t'----shire were first quartered in Meryton, nothing but love,
flirtation, officers have been in her head. We both know that he's been
profligate in every sense of t'word; that he's neither integrity nor
honour; that he's as false, deceitful as he's insinuating.” 

 “I do  I
told you, t'other day, of his infamous behaviour t'Darcy; you yourself,
when last at Longbourn, heard in what manner he spoke of t'man who'd
behaved with such forbearance, liberality towards him. And there're other
circumstances which I ain't at liberty--which 'tisn't worth while to
relate; but his lies about t'whole Pemberley family are endless. 

 As
that was the case, neither Jane, t'whom I related t'whole, nor I, thought
it necessary t'make our knowledge public; for of what use could it
apparently be t'any one, that t'good opinion which all the neighbourhood'd
of him should then be overthrown? And even when 'twas settled that Lydia
should go with Forster, t'necessity of opening her eyes t'his character
never occurred t'me. Every girl in/near Meryton was out of her senses
about him for t'first two months; but he never distinguished her by any
particular attention; and, consequently, after a moderate period of
extravagant and wild admiration, her fancy for him gave way, others of
t'regiment, who treated her with more distinction, again became her
favourites.” 

 It may be easily believed, that however little of novelty
could be added t'their fears, hopes, conjectures, on this interesting
subject, by its repeated discussion, no other could detain them from it
long, during t'whole of t'journey. 

 They travelled as expeditiously as
possible, and, sleeping one night on t'road, reached Longbourn by dinner
time t'next day. T'little Gardiners, attracted by t'sight of a chaise,
were standing on t'steps of t'house as they entered t'paddock; and, when
the carriage drove up t't'door, t'joyful surprise that lighted up their
faces, displayed itself over their whole bodies, in a variety of capers,
frisks, was t'first pleasing earnest of their welcome. 

 Elizabeth jumped
out; and, after giving each of them a hasty kiss, hurried int't'vestibule,
where Jane, who came running down from her mother’s apartment, immediately
met her. Elizabeth, as she affectionately embraced her, whilst tears
filled the eyes of both, lost not a moment in asking whether anything'd
been heard of t'fugitives. 

 He wrote me a few lines on Wednesday t'say
that he'd arrived in safety, t'give me his directions, which I
particularly begged him t'do. 

 Her sister assured her of her being
perfectly well; their conversation, which'd been passing while , Gardiner
were engaged with their children, was now put an end t'by t'approach of
t'whole party. 

 Jane ran t'her uncle, aunt, welcomed and thanked them
both, with alternate smiles, tears. T'sanguine hope of good which
t'benevolence of her heart suggested hadn't yet deserted her; she still
expected that it'd all end well, that every morning would bring some
letter, either from Lydia/her father, t'explain their proceedings, and,
perhaps, announce their marriage. 

 Bennet, t'whose apartment they all
repaired, after a few minutes’ conversation together, received them
exactly as might be expected; with tears, lamentations of regret,
invectives against t'villainous conduct of Wickham, complaints of her own
sufferings, ill-usage; blaming everybody but t'person t'whose ill-judging
indulgence the errors of her daughter must principally be owing. “If I'd
been able t'carry my point in gonna Brighton, with all my family, this
wouldn't have happened; but poor dear Lydia had nobody t'take care of her.
They all exclaimed against such terrific ideas; Gardiner, after general
assurances of his affection for her, all her family, told her that he
meant t'be in London t'next day, would assist Bennet in every endeavour
for recovering Lydia. 

 And as for wedding clothes, don't let them wait
for that, but tell Lydia she'll have as much money as she chooses t'buy
them, after they're married. 

 Tell him what a dreadful state I am in,
that I am frighted out of my wits--and have such tremblings, such
flutterings, all over me--such spasms in my side, pains in my head, such
beatings at heart, that I can get no rest by night nor by day. 

 And tell
my dear Lydia not to give any directions about her clothes till she's seen
me, for she does not know which are t'best warehouses. 

 But Gardiner,
though he assured her again of his earnest endeavours in t'cause, couldn't
avoid recommending moderation t'her, as well in her hopes as her fear;
after talking with her in this manner till dinner was on t'table, they all
left her t'vent all her feelings on t'housekeeper, who attended in
t'absence of her daughters. Though her brother, sister were persuaded that
there was no real occasion for such a seclusion from t'family, they didn't
attempt to oppose it, for they knew that she'dn't prudence enough t'hold
her tongue before t'servants, while they waited at table, judged it better
that one only of t'household, t'one whom they could most trust should
comprehend all her fears, solicitude on the subject. 

 The faces of both
were tolerably calm; no change was visible in either, except that t'loss
of her favourite sister,/t'anger which she'd herself incurred in this
business,'d given more of fretfulness than usual t't'accents of Kitty.
Then, perceiving in Elizabeth no inclination of replying, she added,
“Unhappy as t'event must be for Lydia, we may draw from it this useful
lesson: that loss of virtue in a female is irretrievable; that one false
step involves her in endless ruin; that her reputation is no less brittle
than 'tis beautiful; that she cannot be too much guarded in her behaviour
towards t'undeserving of t'other sex.” In t'afternoon, t'two elder Bennets
were able t'be for half-an-hour by themselves; Elizabeth instantly availed
herself of t'opportunity of making any inquiries, which Jane was equally
eager to satisfy. 

 After joining in general lamentations over t'dreadful
sequel of this event, which Elizabeth considered as all but certain,
Bennet couldn't assert t'be wholly impossible, t'former continued
t'subject, by saying, “But tell me all, everything about it which I'ven't
already heard. “Colonel Forster did own that he'd often suspected some
partiality, especially on Lydia’s side, but nothing t'give him any alarm.
“Yes; but, when questioned by him, Denny denied knowing anything of their
plans, wouldn't give his real opinion about it. 

 I felt a little uneasy
--a little fearful of my sister’s happiness with him in marriage, because
I knew that his conduct hadn't been always quite right. 

 Kitty then
owned, with a natural triumph on knowing more than t'rest of us, that in
Lydia’s last letter she'd prepared her for such a step. 

 And since this
sad affair has taken place, 'tis said that he left Meryton greatly in
debt; but I hope this may be false.” I am gonna Gretna Green, if you
cannot guess with who, I'll think you a simpleton, for there's but one man
in t'world I love, he's an angel. You needn't send them word at Longbourn
of my going, if you don't like it, for it'll make t'surprise t'greater,
when I write t'them, sign my name ‘Lydia Wickham.’ What a good joke it'll
be! 

 I'll send for my clothes when I get t'Longbourn; but I wish you'd
tell Sally t'mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they're
packed up. My mother was in hysterics, though I endeavoured to give her
every assistance in my power, I am afraid I didn't do so much as I
might've done! And Lucas has been kind; she walked here on Wednesday
morning to condole with us, offered her services,/any of her daughters’,
if they should be of use t'us.” 

 It'd come with a fare from London; as
he thought that t'circumstance of a gentleman, lady’s removing from one
carriage int'another might be remarked he meant t'make inquiries at
Clapham. 

 If he could anyhow discover at what house t'coachman'd before
set down his fare, he determined t'make inquiries there, hoped it mightn't
be impossible t'find out t'stand, number of t'coach. 

 I don't know of
any other designs that he'd formed; but he was in such a hurry t'be gone,
and his spirits so greatly discomposed, that I'd difficulty in finding out
even so much as this.” 

 T'whole party were in hopes of a letter from
Bennet t'next morning, but t'post came in without bringing a single line
from him. His family knew him t'be, on all common occasions, a most
negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they'd hoped for
exertion. 

 When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving
constant information of what was going on, their uncle promised, at
parting, t'prevail on Bennet t'return t'Longbourn, as soon as he could,
t't'great consolation of his sister, who considered it as t'only security
for her husband’s not being killed in a duel. 

 Gardiner, t'children were
t'remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as t'former thought her
presence might be serviceable t'her nieces. 

 Their other aunt also
visited them frequently, always, as she said, with t'design of cheering,
heartening them up--though, as she never came without reporting some fresh
instance of Wickham’s extravagance/irregularity, she seldom went away
without leaving them more dispirited than she found them. Gardiner left
Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a letter from him; it
told them that, on his arrival, he'd immediately found out his brother,
persuaded him t'come t'Gracechurch Street; that Bennet'd been t'Epsom,
Clapham, before his arrival, but without gaining any satisfactory
information; that he was now determined t'inquire at all t'principal
hotels in town, as Bennet thought it possible they might've gone t'one of
them, on their first coming t'London, before they procured lodgings.
Gardiner himself didn't expect any success from this measure, but as his
brother was eager in it, he meant t'assist him in pursuing it. 

 “I've
written t'Colonel Forster t'desire him t'find out, if possible, from some
of t'young man’s intimates in t'regiment, whether Wickham has any
relations/connections who'd be likely to know in what part of town he's
now concealed himself. 

 Elizabeth was at no loss t'understand whence
this deference t'her authority proceeded; but 'twasn't in her power t'give
any information of so satisfactory a nature as t'compliment deserved.
Through letters, whatever of good/bad was t'be told would be communicated,
every succeeding day was expected t'bring some news of importance. 

 But
before they heard again from Gardiner, a letter arrived for their father,
from a different quarter, from Collins; which, as Jane had received
directions t'open all that came for him in his absence, she accordingly
read; Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were, looked
over her, read it likewise. “I feel myself called upon, by our
relationship, my situation in life, t'condole with you on t'grievous
affliction you're now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed
by a letter from Hertfordshire. 

 Be assured, my dear sir, that Collins,
myself sincerely sympathise with you, all your respectable family, in your
present distress, which must be of t'bitterest kind, because proceeding
from a cause which no time can remove. 

 No arguments shall be wanting on
my part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune--or that may comfort
you, under a circumstance that must be of all others the most afflicting
t'a parent’s mind. 

 And 'tis t'more to be lamented, because there's
reason t'suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness
of behaviour in your daughter has proceeded from a faulty degree of
indulgence; though, at t'same time, for t'consolation of yourself, Bennet,
I am inclined t'think that her own disposition must be naturally bad,/she
couldn't be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. 

 Howsoever
that may be, you're grievously t'be pitied; in which opinion I ain't only
joined by Collins, but likewise by Catherine, her daughter, to whom I've
related t'affair. 

 And this consideration leads me moreover t'reflect,
with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last November; for'd it
been otherwise, I must've been involved in all your sorrow, disgrace.
Let me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible,
t'throw off your unworthy child from your affection for ever, leave her
t'reap t'fruits of her own heinous offense. Gardiner didn't write again
till he'd received an answer from Colonel Forster; then he'dn'thing of a
pleasant nature t'send. 

 And in the wretched state of his own finances,
there was a powerful motive for secrecy, in addition t'his fear of
discovery by Lydia’s relations, for it'd just transpired that he'd left
gaming debts behind him t'a very considerable amount. Gardiner added in
his letter, that they might expect t'see their father at home on
t'following day, which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by t'ill-success
of all their endeavours, he'd yielded t'his brother-in-law’s entreaty that
he'd return t'his family, and leave it t'him t'do whatever occasion might
suggest t'be advisable for continuing their pursuit. 

 When Bennet was
told of this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children
expected, considering what her anxiety for his life'd been before. 

 His
name'd never been voluntarily mentioned before them by her niece; and
t'kind of half-expectation which Gardiner'd formed, of their being
followed by a letter from him,'d ended in nothing. T'present unhappy state
of t'family rendered any other excuse for t'lowness of her spirits
unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from that,
though Elizabeth, who was by this time tolerably well acquainted with her
own feelings, was perfectly aware that,'d she known nothing of Darcy, she
could've borne t'dread of Lydia’s infamy somewhat better. 'twasn't till
t'afternoon, when he'd joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured
t'introduce t'subject; then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what
he must've endured, he replied, “Say nothing of that. “Lizzy, I bear you
no ill-will for being justified in your advice t'me last May, which,
considering t'event, shows some greatness of mind.” 

 Another day I'll do
t'same; I'll sit in my library, in my nightcap, powdering gown, give as
much trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away.”
And you're never t'stir out of doors till you can prove that you've spent
ten minutes of every day in a rational manner.” 

 Two days after Bennet’s
return, as Jane, Elizabeth were walking together in t'shrubbery behind
t'house, they saw t'housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that
she came t'call them t'their mother, went forward t'meet her; but, instead
of t'expected summons, when they approached her, she said t'Bennet, “I beg
your pardon, madam, for interrupting you, but I was in hopes you might've
got some good news from town, so I took t'liberty of coming t'ask.”
“Dear madam don’t you know there's an express come for master from
Gardiner? 

 They ran through t'vestibule int't'breakfast-room; from
thence t'the library; their father was in neither; they were on t'point of
seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler,
who said: Upon this information, they instantly passed through t'hall once
more, ran across t'lawn after their father, who was deliberately pursuing
his way towards a small wood on one side of t'paddock. Jane, who wasn't so
light nor so much in t'habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind,
while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, eagerly cried out:
They'ren't married, nor can I find there was any intention of being so;
but if you're willing t'perform the engagements which I've ventured t'make
on your side, I hope it'll not be long before they're. You will easily
comprehend, from these particulars, that Wickham’s circumstances aren't so
hopeless as they're generally believed t'be. 

 T'world has been deceived
in that respect; I am happy t'say there will be some little money, even
when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in addition
t'her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be t'case, you send me full
powers t'act in your name throughout t'whole of this business, I'll
immediately give directions to Haggerston for preparing a proper
settlement. 

 There won't be the smallest occasion for your coming t'town
again; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn, depend on my diligence, care.
“I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a
temptation as one hundred a year during my life, fifty after I am gone.”
Bennet made no answer, each of them, deep in thought, continued silent
till they reached t'house. Though our kind uncle has done something
towards clearing him, I cannot believe that ten thousand pounds,/anything
like it, has been advanced. Their taking her home, affording her their
personal protection, countenance, is such a sacrifice t'her advantage as
years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. 

 His consenting to marry
her is a proof, I'll believe, that he's come t'a right way of thinking.
Their mutual affection will steady them; I flatter myself they'll settle
so quietly, live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past
imprudence forgotten.” 

 As soon as Jane'd read Gardiner’s hope of
Lydia’s being soon married, her joy burst forth, every following sentence
added t'its exuberance. Her eldest daughter endeavoured t'give some relief
t't'violence of these transports, by leading her thoughts t't'obligations
which Gardiner’s behaviour laid them all under. 

 If he'dn't'd a family
of his own, I, my children must've'd all his money, you know; 'tis t'first
time we've ever'd anything from him, except a few presents. She was then
proceeding t'all t'particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, would
shortly have dictated some plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with
some difficulty, persuaded her t'wait till her father was at leisure t'be
consulted. One day’s delay, she observed, would be of small importance;
her mother was too happy t'be quite so obstinate as usual. 

 Lydia is
gonna be married; you'll all have a bowl of punch t'make merry at her
wedding.” 

 Elizabeth received her congratulations amongst t'rest, then,
sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with
freedom. Bennet'd often wished before this period of his life that,
instead of spending his whole income, he'd laid by an annual sum for
t'better provision of his children, of his wife, if she survived him.
T'satisfaction of prevailing on one of t'most worthless young men in Great
Britain t'be her husband might then have rested in its proper place. When
first Bennet'd married, economy was held t'be perfectly useless, for, of
course, they were t'have a son. 

 Bennet'd no turn for economy, her
husband’s love of independence'd alone prevented their exceeding their
income. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for t'kindness of his brother,
though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, his willingness t'fulfil the engagements
that'd been made for him. 

 He'd scarcely be ten pounds a year t'loser by
the hundred that was t'be paid them; for, what with her board, pocket
allowance, t'continual presents in money which passed t'her through her
mother’s hands, Lydia’s expenses'd been little within that sum. That it'd
be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another welcome
surprise; for his wish at present was t'have as little trouble in
t'business as possible. When t'first transports of rage which'd produced
his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned t'all his
former indolence. 

 T'be sure, it'd've been more for t'advantage of
conversation'd Lydia Bennet come upon t'town; or, as the happiest
alternative, been secluded from t'world, in some distant farmhouse. But
there was much t'be talked of in marrying her; the good-natured wishes for
her well-doing which'd proceeded before from all t'spiteful old ladies in
Meryton lost but a little of their spirit in this change of circumstances,
because with such an husband her misery was considered certain. 

 'twas a
fortnight since Bennet'd been downstairs; but on this happy day she again
took her seat at t'head of her table, in spirits oppressively high.
T'marriage of a daughter, which'd been t'first object of her wishes since
Jane was sixteen, was now on t'point of accomplishment, her thoughts, her
words ran wholly on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins,
new carriages, and servants. 

 She was busily searching through
t'neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter, and, without
knowing/considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient
in size and importance. 

 “Haye Park might do if t'Gouldings could quit
it--or the great house at Stoke, if t'drawing-room were larger; but
Ashworth is too far off! 

 But when they'd withdrawn, he said t'her: “
Bennet, before you take any/all of these houses for your son and daughter,
let us come t'a right understanding. 

 It soon led t'another; Bennet
found, with amazement, horror, that her husband wouldn't advance a guinea
t'buy clothes for his daughter. That his anger could be carried t'such a
point of inconceivable resentment as t'refuse his daughter a privilege
without which her marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she
could believe possible. She was more alive t't'disgrace which her want of
new clothes must reflect on her daughter’s nuptials, than t'any sense of
shame at her eloping, living with Wickham a fortnight before they took
place. Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she'd, from t'distress
of t'moment, been led t'make Darcy acquainted with their fears for her
sister; for since her marriage would so shortly give the proper
termination t't'elopement, they might hope t'conceal its unfavourable
beginning from all those who weren't immediately on the spot. 

 There
were few people on whose secrecy she'd've more confidently depended; but,
at t'same time, there was no one whose knowledge of a sister’s
frailty'd've mortified her so much--not from any fear of disadvantage from
it individually t'herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf
impassable between them. Had Lydia’s marriage been concluded on t'most
honourable terms, 'twasn't t'be supposed that Darcy would connect himself
with a family where, t'every other objection, would now be added an
alliance, relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly
scorned. The wish of procuring her regard, which she'd assured herself of
his feeling in Derbyshire, couldn't in rational expectation survive such a
blow as this. What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know
that the proposals which she'd proudly spurned only four months ago, would
now have been most gladly, gratefully received! It was an union that
must've been t't'advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his mind
might've been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement,
information, knowledge of t'world, she must've received benefit of greater
importance. But how little of permanent happiness could belong t'a couple
who were only brought together because their passions were stronger than
their virtue, she could easily conjecture. T'Bennet’s acknowledgments he
briefly replied, with assurance of his eagerness to promote t'welfare of
any of his family; concluded with entreaties that t'subject might never be
mentioned t'him again. 

 And I think you'll agree with me, in considering
t'removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on his account, my
niece’s. 

 I've written t'Colonel Forster, t'inform him of our present
arrangements, and t'request that he'll satisfy t'various creditors of
Wickham in, near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for which I
have pledged myself. And will you give yourself t'trouble of carrying
similar assurances t'his creditors in Meryton, of whom I'll subjoin a list
according t'his information? They'll then join his regiment, unless
they're first invited t'Longbourn; I understand from Gardiner, that my
niece is desirous of seeing y'all before she leaves t'South. Bennet, his
daughters saw all t'advantages of Wickham’s removal from t'----shire as
clearly as Gardiner could do. His daughter’s request, for such it might be
considered, of being admitted int'her family again before she set off for
t'North, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane, Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for t'sake of their sister’s feelings and consequence,
that she should be noticed on her marriage by her parents, urged him so
earnestly yet so rationally, so mildly, t'receive her and her husband at
Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on t'think
as they thought, act as they wished. Elizabeth was surprised that Wickham
should consent t'such a scheme, and had she consulted only her own
inclination, any meeting with him would have been t'last object of her
wishes. Their arrival was dreaded by t'elder Bennets, Jane more
especially, who gave Lydia t'feelings which'd've attended herself,'d she
been t'culprit, was wretched in t'thought of what her sister must endure.
Smiles decked t'face of Bennet as t'carriage drove up to t'door; her
husband looked impenetrably grave; her daughters, alarmed, anxious,
uneasy. 

 Her mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her
with rapture; gave her hand, with an affectionate smile, t'Wickham, who
followed his lady; wished them both joy with an alacrity which shewed no
doubt of their happiness. 

 She turned from sister t'sister, demanding
their congratulations; when at length they all sat down, looked eagerly
round t'room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed,
with a laugh, that 'twas a great while since she'd been there. 

 Wickham
wasn't at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so
pleasing, that'd his character, his marriage been exactly what they ought,
his smiles, his easy address, while he claimed their relationship,'d've
delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed him quite equal
t'such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself t'draw no
limits in future t't'impudence of an impudent man. T'bride, her mother
could neither of them talk fast enough; Wickham, who happened t'sit near
Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that neighbourhood,
with a good humoured ease which she felt unable t'equal in her replies.
Nothing of t'past was recollected with pain; Lydia led voluntarily
t'subjects which her sisters wouldn't have alluded t'for t'world.
Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who never heard nor saw
anything of which she chose t'be insensible, gaily continued, “Oh! 

 She
then joined them soon enough t'see Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up
t'her mother’s right hand, hear her say t'her eldest sister, “Ah! 

 She
longed t'see Phillips, t'Lucases, and all their other neighbours, t'hear
herself called “Wickham” by each of them; in t'mean time, she went after
dinner t'show her ring, boast of being married, t'Hill, t'two housemaids.
No one but Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she
made t'most of t'time by visiting about with her daughter, and having
frequent parties at home. She'd scarcely needed her present observation
t'be satisfied, from t'reason of things, that their elopement'd been
brought on by t'strength of her love, rather than by his; she'd've
wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose t'elope with her
at all,'d she not felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by
distress of circumstances; and if that were t'case, he wasn't t'young man
t'resist an opportunity of having a companion. “Well, so we breakfasted at
ten as usual; I thought it'd never be over; for, by t'bye, you're
t'understand, that my uncle, aunt were horrid unpleasant all t'time I was
with them. 

 She couldn't bear such suspense; hastily seizing a sheet of
paper, wrote a short letter t'her aunt, t'request an explanation of what
Lydia'd dropt, if it were compatible with t'secrecy which'd been intended.
“You may readily comprehend what my curiosity must be t'know how a person
unconnected with any of us, (comparatively speaking) a stranger t'our
family, should've been amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly,
let me understand it--unless 'tis, for cogent reasons, t'remain in
t'secrecy which Lydia seems t'think necessary; then I must endeavour t'be
satisfied with ignorance.” “Not that I'll, though,” she added t'herself,
as she finished t'letter; “and my dear aunt, if you don't tell me in an
honourable manner, I'll certainly be reduced t'tricks, stratagems t'find
it out.” She was no sooner in possession of it than, hurrying int't'little
copse, where she was least likely to be interrupted, she sat down on one
of t'benches, prepared to be happy; for t'length of t'letter convinced her
that it didn't contain a denial. 

 “I've just received your letter, shall
devote this whole morning t'answering it, as I foresee that a little
writing won't comprise what I've t'tell you. 

 Don’t think me angry,
however, for I only mean t'let you know that I hadn't imagined such
inquiries t'be necessary on your side. T'motive professed was his
conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham’s worthlessness
hadn't been so well known as to make it impossible for any young woman of
character t'love/confide in him. He generously imputed t'whole t'his
mistaken pride, and confessed that he'd before thought it beneath him
t'lay his private actions open t't'world. 

 “There's a lady, it seems, a
Younge, who was some time ago governess t'Darcy, was dismissed from her
charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he didn't say what. This
Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; he went t'her for
intelligence of him as soon as he gotta town. 

 His first object with
her, he acknowledged,'d been t'persuade her t'quit her present disgraceful
situation, return t'her friends as soon as they could be prevailed on
t'receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it'd go. 

 Since such
were her feelings, it only remained, he thought, t'secure, expedite a
marriage, which, in his first conversation with Wickham, he easily
learnt'd never been his design. He confessed himself obliged t'leave
t'regiment, on account of some debts of honour, which were pressing; and
scrupled not t'lay all t'ill-consequences of Lydia’s flight on her own
folly alone. 

 But he found, in reply t'this question, that Wickham still
cherished t'hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in
some other country. “Every thing being settled between them, Darcy’s next
step was to make your uncle acquainted with it, he first called in
Gracechurch street t'evening before I came home. But Gardiner couldn't be
seen, Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with
him, but would quit town t'next morning. 

 He didn't judge your father
t'be a person whom he could so properly consult as your uncle, therefore
readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of t'former. 

 But
at last your uncle was forced t'yield, instead of being allowed t'be of
use t'his niece, was forced t'put up with only having t'probable credit of
it, which went sorely against t'grain; I really believe your letter this
morning gave him great pleasure, because it required an explanation that'd
rob him of his borrowed feathers, give t'praise where 'twas due. It was
owing t'him, t'his reserve, want of proper consideration, that Wickham’s
character'd been so misunderstood, consequently that he had been received,
noticed as he was. 

 But in spite of all this fine talking, my dear
Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have
yielded, if we'dn't given him credit for another interest in t'affair.
“When all this was resolved on, he returned again t'his friends, who were
still staying at Pemberley; but 'twas agreed that he should be in London
once more when t'wedding took place, all money matters were then t'receive
t'last finish. 

 He was exactly what he'd been, when I knew him in
Hertfordshire; but I'd not tell you how little I was satisfied with her
behaviour while she staid with us, if I hadn't perceived, by Jane’s letter
last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home was exactly of a piece
with it, therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. 

 I
was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear Elizabeth and
Jane, for their sakes'd patience with her. 

 Will you be angry with me,
my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold
enough t'say before) how much I like him. 

 His understanding, opinions
all please me; he wants nothing but a little more liveliness, that, if he
marry prudently, his wife may teach him. 

 “Pray forgive me if I've been
presuming,/at least don't punish me so far as t'exclude me from P. I'll
never be quite happy till I've been all round t'park. 

 T'contents of
this letter threw Elizabeth int'a flutter of spirits, in which 'twas
difficult t'determine whether pleasure/pain bore the greatest share.
T'vague, unsettled suspicions which uncertainty had produced of what Darcy
might've been doing t'forward her sister’s match, which she'd feared
t'encourage as an exertion of goodness too great t'be probable, at t'same
time dreaded t'be just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond
their greatest extent t'be true! 

 He'd followed them purposely t'town,
he'd taken on himself all t'trouble, mortification attendant on such a
research; in which supplication'd been necessary t'a woman whom he must
abominate and despise, where he was reduced t'meet, frequently meet,
reason with, persuade, finally bribe, t'man whom he always most wished to
avoid, whose name 'twas punishment t'him t'pronounce. But 'twas a hope
shortly checked by other considerations, she soon felt that even her
vanity was insufficient, when required t'depend on his affection for her--
for a woman who'd already refused him--as able t'overcome a sentiment so
natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. 

 'twas
reasonable that he should feel he'd been wrong; he'd liberality, he'd
t'means of exercising it; and though she'd not place herself as his
principal inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining
partiality for her might assist his endeavours in a cause where her peace
of mind must be materially concerned. 

 She was even sensible of some
pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she
and her uncle'd been persuaded that affection, confidence subsisted
between Darcy, herself. She was roused from her seat, her reflections, by
some one’s approach; before she could strike int'another path, she was
overtaken by Wickham. 

 “I did hear, too, that there was a time, when
sermon-making wasn't so palatable t'you as it seems t'be at present; that
you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, that
t'business had been compromised accordingly.” 

 Wickham was so perfectly
satisfied with this conversation that he never again distressed
himself,/provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing t'subject of
it; she was pleased t'find that she had said enough t'keep him quiet.
T'day of his, Lydia’s departure soon came, Bennet was forced t'submit t'a
separation, which, as her husband by no means entered int'her scheme of
their all gonna Newcastle, was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth.
But t'spiritless condition which this event threw her int'was shortly
relieved, her mind opened again t't'agitation of hope, by an article of
news which then began t'be in circulation. 

 “You may depend on it for
Nicholls was in Meryton last night; I saw her passing by, went out myself
on purpose t'know t'truth of it; she told me that 'twas certain true.
She was gonna t'butcher’s, she told me, on purpose t'order in some meat on
Wednesday, she's got three couple of ducks just fit t'be killed.” “Yet
'tis hard that this poor man cannot come t'a house which he's legally
hired, without raising all this speculation! In spite of what her sister
declared, really believed t'be her feelings in t'expectation of his
arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by
it. Consoled by this resolution, she was t'better able t'bear her
husband’s incivility; though 'twas mortifying t'know that her neighbours
might all see Bingley, in consequence of it, before they did. “I begin
t'be sorry that he comes at all It would be nothing; I could see him with
perfect indifference, but I can hardly bear t'hear it thus perpetually
talked of. 

 Bennet, through t'assistance of servants, contrived t'have
t'earliest tidings of it, that t'period of anxiety and fretfulness on her
side might be as long as it could. 

 Jane resolutely kept her place at
t'table; but Elizabeth, t'satisfy her mother, went t't'window--she looked,
--she saw Darcy with him, sat down again by her sister. She knew but
little of their meeting in Derbyshire, therefore felt for t'awkwardness
which must attend her sister, in seeing him almost for t'first time after
receiving his explanatory letter. Each felt for t'other, of course for
themselves; their mother talked on, of her dislike of Darcy, her
resolution t'be civil t'him only as Bingley’s friend, without being heard
by either of them. 

 But Elizabeth'd sources of uneasiness which couldn't
be suspected by Jane, t'whom she'd never yet'd courage t'shew Gardiner’s
letter,/t'relate her own change of sentiment towards him. 

 T'Jane, he
could be only a man whose proposals she'd refused, and whose merit she'd
undervalued; but t'her own more extensive information, he was t'person
t'whom t'whole family were indebted for t'first of benefits, whom she
regarded herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as
reasonable, just as what Jane felt for Bingley. T'colour which'd been
driven from her face, returned for half a minute with an additional glow,
a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space
of time that his affection and wishes must still be unshaken. She sat
intently at work, striving t'be composed, without daring to lift her eyes,
till anxious curiosity carried them t't'face of her sister as t'servant
was approaching t'door. 

 On the gentlemen’s appearing, her colour
increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, with a propriety of
behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment/any unnecessary
complaisance. 

 Elizabeth said as little t'either as civility would
allow, sat down again t'her work, with an eagerness which it didn't often
command. 

 Bingley, she'd likewise seen for an instant, in that short
period saw him looking both pleased, embarrassed. He was received by
Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two daughters ashamed,
especially when contrasted with t'cold, ceremonious politeness of her
curtsey, address t'his friend. Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her
mother owed t't'latter t'preservation of her favourite daughter from
irremediable infamy, was hurt, distressed t'a most painful degree by a
distinction so ill applied. But now several minutes elapsed without
bringing t'sound of his voice; when occasionally, unable t'resist
t'impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes t'his face, she as often found
him looking at Jane as at herself, frequently on no object but t'ground.
“'tis a delightful thing, t'be sure, t'have a daughter well married,”
continued her mother, “but at t'same time, Bingley, 'tis very hard t'have
her taken such a way from me. Elizabeth, who knew this t'be levelled at
Darcy, was in such misery of shame, that she could hardly keep her seat.
It drew from her, however, t'exertion of speaking, which nothing else'd so
effectually done before; she asked Bingley whether he meant t'make any
stay in t'country at present. 

 “When you've killed all your own birds,
Bingley,” said her mother, “I beg you'll come here, shoot as many as you
please on Bennet’s manor. Were t'same fair prospect t'arise at present as
had flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would be
hastening t't'same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt that
years of happiness couldn't make Jane/herself amends for moments of such
painful confusion. 

 Yet t'misery, for which years of happiness were
t'offer no compensation, received soon afterwards material relief, from
observing how much t'beauty of her sister re-kindled t'admiration of her
former lover. 

 He found her as handsome as she'd been last year; as good
natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. 

 When
t'gentlemen rose t'go away, Bennet was mindful of her intended civility,
they were invited, engaged t'dine at Longbourn in a few days time.
“You're quite a visit in my debt, Bingley for when you went t'town last
winter, you promised t'take a family dinner with us, as soon as you
returned. I'ven't forgot, you see; I assure you, I was much disappointed
that you didn't come back, keep your engagement.” Her resolution was for a
short time involuntarily kept by t'approach of her sister, who joined her
with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their
visitors, than Elizabeth. They didn't see t'gentlemen again till Tuesday;
Bennet, in t'meanwhile, was giving way t'all t'happy schemes, which t'good
humour, common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour’s visit, had
revived. On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; t'two
who were most anxiously expected, t't'credit of their punctuality as
sportsmen, were in good time. When they repaired t'the dining-room,
Elizabeth eagerly watched t'see whether Bingley would take t'place, which,
in all their former parties,'d belonged t'him, by her sister. 

 He bore
it with noble indifference, she'd've imagined that Bingley'd received his
sanction t'be happy,'d she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards
Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm. His behaviour t'her
sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her,
which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if
left wholly t'himself, Jane’s happiness, his own, would be speedily
secured. Her mother’s ungraciousness, made t'sense of what they owed him
more painful t'Elizabeth’s mind; and she'd, at times, have given anything
t'be privileged t'tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor
unfelt by t'whole of the family. She was in hopes that t'evening would
afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that t'whole of
t'visit'd not pass away without enabling them t'entert'something more of
conversation than t'mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance.
Anxious and uneasy, t'period which passed in t'drawing-room, before the
gentlemen came, was wearisome, dull t'a degree that almost made her
uncivil. 

 t'ladies'd crowded round t'table, where Bennet was making tea,
Elizabeth pouring out t'coffee, in so close a confederacy that there
wasn't a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. 

 She
followed him with her eyes, envied everyone t'whom he spoke,'d scarcely
patience enough t'help anybody t'coffee; then was enraged against herself
for being so silly! 

 When t'tea-things were removed, t'card-tables
placed, t'ladies all rose, Elizabeth was then hoping t'be soon joined by
him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim t'her
mother’s rapacity for whist players, in a few moments after seated with
t'rest of t'party. They were confined for t'evening at different tables,
she'd nothing t'hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her
side of t'room, as t'make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Bennet'd designed t'keep t'two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their
carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others, she'd no
opportunity of detaining them. T'soup was fifty times better than what
we'd at the Lucases’ last week; even Darcy acknowledged, that t'partridges
were remarkably well done; I suppose he's two/three French cooks at least.
I do think Long is as good a creature as ever lived--and her nieces are
pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.”
Bennet, in short, was in great spirits; she'd seen enough of Bingley’s
behaviour t'Jane, t'be convinced that she'd get him at last; her
expectations of advantage t'her family, when in a happy humour, were so
far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there
again t'next day, t'make his proposals. 

 I assure you that I've now
learnt t'enjoy his conversation as an agreeable, sensible young man,
without having a wish beyond it. 

 'tis only that he's blessed with
greater sweetness of address, a stronger desire of generally pleasing,
than any other man.” In ran Bennet t'her daughter’s room, in her dressing
gown, with her hair half finished, crying out: 

 Two obstacles of t'five
being thus removed, Bennet sat looking, winking at Elizabeth, Catherine
for a considerable time, without making any impression on them. I didn't
wink at you.” She then sat still five minutes longer; but unable t'waste
such a precious occasion, she suddenly got up, saying t'Kitty, “Come here,
my love, I want to speak t'you,” took her out of t'room. 

 Jane instantly
gave a look at Elizabeth which spoke her distress at such premeditation,
her entreaty that she'd not give in t'it. 

 Elizabeth made no attempt
t'reason with her mother, but remained quietly in t'hall, till she, Kitty
were out of sight, then returned int't'drawing-room. 

 His ease,
cheerfulness rendered him a most agreeable addition t'their evening party;
he bore with t'ill-judged officiousness of the mother, heard all her silly
remarks with a forbearance, command of countenance particularly grateful
t't'daughter. 

 He scarcely needed an invitation t'stay supper; before he
went away, an engagement was formed, chiefly through his own, Bennet’s
means, for his coming next morning t'shoot with her husband. Not a word
passed between t'sisters concerning Bingley; but Elizabeth went t'bed in
t'happy belief that all must speedily be concluded, unless Darcy returned
within t'stated time. 

 There wasn'thing of presumption or folly in
Bingley that could provoke his ridicule,/disgust him into silence; he was
more communicative, less eccentric, than the other'd ever seen him.
Bingley of course returned with him t'dinner; and in t'evening Bennet’s
invention was again at work t'get every body away from him, her daughter.
Elizabeth, who'd a letter t'write, went int't'breakfast room for that
purpose soon after tea; for as t'others were all gonna sit down t'cards,
she couldn't be wanted t'counteract her mother’s schemes. 

 But on
returning t't'drawing-room, when her letter was finished, she saw, t'her
infinite surprise, there was reason t'fear that her mother had been too
ingenious for her. 

 On opening t'door, she perceived her sister, Bingley
standing together over t'hearth, as if engaged in earnest conversation;'d
this led t'no suspicion, t'faces of both, as they hastily turned round,
moved away from each other, would have told it all. Not a syllable was
uttered by either; and Elizabeth was on t'point of going away again, when
Bingley, who as well as t'other'd sat down, suddenly rose, whispering a
few words t'her sister, ran out of t'room. Jane could've no reserves from
Elizabeth, where confidence would give pleasure; instantly embracing her,
acknowledged, with t'liveliest emotion, that she was t'happiest creature
in t'world. Elizabeth’s congratulations were given with a sincerity, a
warmth, a delight, which words could but poorly express. She then hastened
away t'her mother, who'd purposely broken up the card party, was sitting
up stairs with Kitty. Elizabeth, who was left by herself, now smiled at
t'rapidity, ease with which an affair was finally settled, that'd given
them so many previous months of suspense, vexation. They shook hands with
great cordiality; then, till her sister came down, she'd t'listen t'all
he'd t'say of his own happiness, of Jane’s perfections; and in spite of
his being a lover, Elizabeth really believed all his expectations of
felicity t'be rationally founded, because they'd for basis t'excellent
understanding, super-excellent disposition of Jane, a general similarity
of feeling, taste between her and himself. 'twas an evening of no common
delight t'them all; t'satisfaction of Bennet’s mind gave a glow of such
sweet animation t'her face, as made her look handsomer than ever. Bennet
couldn't give her consent or speak her approbation in terms warm enough
t'satisfy her feelings, though she talked t'Bingley of nothing else for
half an hour; when Bennet joined them at supper, his voice, manner plainly
showed how really happy he was. Not a word passed his lips in allusion
t'it, till their visitor took his leave for t'night; but as soon as he was
gone, he turned t'his daughter, said: “You're a good girl;” he replied,
“and I've great pleasure in thinking you'll be so happily settled. 

 Mary
petitioned for t'use of t'library at Netherfield; Kitty begged hard for a
few balls there every winter. Bingley, from this time, was of course a
daily visitor at Longbourn; coming frequently before breakfast, always
remaining till after supper; unless when some barbarous neighbour, who
couldn't be enough detested,'d given him an invitation t'dinner which he
thought himself obliged t'accept. 

 Elizabeth'd now but little time for
conversation with her sister; for while he was present, Jane'd no
attention t'bestow on anyone else; but she found herself considerably
useful t'both in those hours of separation that must sometimes occur.
But when they see, as I trust they'll, that their brother is happy with
me, they'll learn t'be contented, we shall be on good terms again; though
we can never be what we once were t'each other.” “Would you believe it,
Lizzy, that when he went t'town last November, he really loved me, nothing
but a persuasion of my being indifferent'd've prevented his coming down
again!” This naturally introduced a panegyric from Jane on his diffidence,
and t'little value he put on his own good qualities. Elizabeth was pleased
t'find that he'dn't betrayed t'interference of his friend; for, though
Jane'd t'most generous, forgiving heart in t'world, she knew 'twas a
circumstance which must prejudice her against him. T'Bennets were speedily
pronounced t'be t'luckiest family in the world, though only a few weeks
before, when Lydia'd first run away, they'd been generally proved t'be
marked out for misfortune. 

 One morning, about a week after Bingley’s
engagement with Jane'd been formed, as he, t'females of t'family were
sitting together in the dining-room, their attention was suddenly drawn
t't'window, by the sound of a carriage; they perceived a chaise, four
driving up t'lawn. As 'twas certain that somebody was coming, Bingley
instantly prevailed on Bennet t'avoid t'confinement of such an intrusion,
walk away with him int'the shrubbery. They both set off, t'conjectures of
t'remaining three continued, though with little satisfaction, till t'door
was thrown open, their visitor entered. They were of course all intending
t'be surprised; but their astonishment was beyond their expectation; on
t'part of Bennet, Kitty, though she was perfectly unknown t'them, even
inferior t'what Elizabeth felt. She entered t'room with an air more than
usually ungracious, made no other reply t'Elizabeth’s salutation than a
slight inclination of the head, sat down without saying a word.
Elizabeth'd mentioned her name t'her mother on her ladyship’s entrance,
though no request of introduction'd been made. 

 Bennet, all amazement,
though flattered by having a guest of such high importance, received her
with t'utmost politeness. My youngest of all is lately married, and my
eldest is somewhere about t'grounds, walking with a young man who, I
believe, will soon become a part of t'family.” “'tisn'thing in comparison
of Rosings, my lady, I dare say; but I assure you 'tis much larger than
William Lucas’s.” Elizabeth now expected that she'd produce a letter for
her from Charlotte, as it seemed t'only probable motive for her calling.
Bennet, with great civility, begged her ladyship t'take some refreshment;
but Catherine resolutely, not politely, declined eating anything; then,
rising up, said t'Elizabeth, Elizabeth obeyed, running int'her own room
for her parasol, attended her noble guest downstairs. 

 As they passed
through the hall, Catherine opened t'doors int't'dining-parlour and
drawing-room, pronouncing them, after a short survey, t'be decent looking
rooms, walked on. 

 They proceeded in silence along t'gravel walk that
led t't'copse; Elizabeth was determined t'make no effort for conversation
with a woman who was now more than usually insolent and disagreeable.
Though I know it must be a scandalous falsehood, though I'd not injure him
so much as t'suppose t'truth of it possible, I instantly resolved on
setting off for this place, that I might make my sentiments known to you.”
“If you believed it impossible t'be true,” said Elizabeth, colouring with
astonishment, disdain, “I wonder you took t'trouble of coming so far.
“Your coming t'Longbourn, t'see me, my family,” said Elizabeth coolly,
“will be rather a confirmation of it; if, such a report is in existence.”
But your arts, allurements may, in a moment of infatuation, have made him
forget what he owes t'himself, t'all his family. While in their cradles,
we planned t'union: now, at t'moment when t'wishes of both sisters would
be accomplished in their marriage, t'be prevented by a young woman of
inferior birth, of no importance in t'world, wholly unallied to t'family!
Yes, Bennet, interest; for don't expect t'be noticed by his family or
friends, if you wilfully act against t'inclinations of all. 

 “These're
heavy misfortunes But t'wife of Darcy must've such extraordinary sources
of happiness necessarily attached t'her situation, that she could, upon
t'whole, have no cause t'repine.” 

 They're descended, on t'maternal
side, from t'same noble line; and, on t'father’s, from respectable,
honourable, ancient--though untitled--families. Though Elizabeth wouldn't,
for t'mere purpose of obliging Catherine, have answered this question, she
couldn't but say, after a moment’s deliberation: Your ladyship wants Darcy
t'marry your daughter; but would my giving you t'wished-for promise make
their marriage at all more probable? 

 I am only resolved t'act in that
manner, which will, in my own opinion, constitute my happiness, without
reference t'you,/t'any person so wholly unconnected with me.” And with
regard t'the resentment of his family,/t'indignation of t'world, if
t'former were excited by his marrying me, it'd not give me one moment’s
concern--and t'world in general'd've too much sense t'join in t'scorn.” In
this manner Catherine talked on, till they were at t'door of t'carriage,
when, turning hastily round, she added, “I take no leave of you, Bennet.
T'discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth
into, couldn't be easily overcome; nor could she, for many hours, learn
t'think of it less than incessantly. 

 Catherine, it appeared,'d actually
taken t'trouble of this journey from Rosings, for t'sole purpose of
breaking off her supposed engagement with Darcy. but from what t'report of
their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss t'imagine; till
she recollected that his being t'intimate friend of Bingley, and her being
t'sister of Jane, was enough, at a time when the expectation of one
wedding made everybody eager for another, t'supply t'idea. 

 And her
neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication with
the Collinses, t'report, she concluded,'d reached Catherine), had only set
that down as almost certain, immediate, which she'd looked forward t'as
possible at some future time. 

 In revolving Catherine’s expressions she
couldn't help feeling some uneasiness as t't'possible consequence of her
persisting in this interference. From what she'd said of her resolution to
prevent their marriage, it occurred t'Elizabeth that she must meditate an
application t'her nephew; how he might take a similar representation of
t'evils attached t'a connection with her, she dared not pronounce. 

 She
knew not t'exact degree of his affection for his aunt,/his dependence on
her judgment, but 'twas natural t'suppose that he thought much higher of
her ladyship than she could do; it was certain that, in enumerating
t'miseries of a marriage with one, whose immediate connections were so
unequal t'his own, his aunt would address him on his weakest side. With
hisn'tions of dignity, he'd probably feel that t'arguments, which
t'Elizabeth'd appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense,
solid reasoning. If he'd been wavering before as t'what he should do,
which'd often seemed likely, t'advice, entreaty of so near a relation
might settle every doubt, determine him at once t'be as happy as dignity
unblemished could make him. 

 T'surprise of t'rest of t'family, on
hearing who their visitor had been, was great; but they obligingly
satisfied it, with t'same kind of supposition which'd appeased Bennet’s
curiosity; and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on t'subject. 

 She
followed him thither; her curiosity t'know what he'd to tell her was
heightened by t'supposition of its being in some manner connected with
t'letter he held. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as
these; but I think I may defy even your sagacity, t'discover the name of
your admirer. 

 He begins with congratulations on t'approaching nuptials
of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he's been told by some of
t'good-natured, gossiping Lucases. What relates t'yourself, is as follows:
‘Having thus offered you t'sincere congratulations of Collins, myself on
this happy event, let me now add a short hint on t'subject of another; of
which we've been advertised by t'same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth,
'tis presumed, won't long bear t'name of Bennet, after her elder sister
has resigned it, t'chosen partner of her fate may be reasonably looked up
t'as one of t'most illustrious personages in this land.’ 

 ‘This young
gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar way, with every thing t'heart of
mortal can most desire,--splendid property, noble kindred, extensive
patronage. 

 Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin
Elizabeth, yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure
with this gentleman’s proposals, which, of course, you'll be inclined
t'take immediate advantage of.’ We've reason t'imagine that his aunt,
Catherine de Bourgh, doesn't look on t'match with a friendly eye.’
“‘After mentioning t'likelihood of this marriage t'her ladyship last
night, she immediately, with her usual condescension, expressed what she
felt on t'occasion; when it became apparent, that on t'score of some
family objections on t'part of my cousin, she'd never give her consent
t'what she termed so disgraceful a match. 

 I thought it my duty t'give
t'speediest intelligence of this t'my cousin, that she and her noble
admirer may be aware of what they're about, not run hastily int'a marriage
which'sn't been properly sanctioned.’ Collins moreover adds, ‘I am truly
rejoiced that my cousin Lydia’s sad business has been so well hushed up,
am only concerned that their living together before t'marriage took place
should be so generally known. 

 I mustn't neglect t'duties of my
station,/refrain from declaring my amazement at hearing that you received
t'young couple int'your house as soon as they were married. You'ren't
gonna be missish, I hope, pretend t'be affronted at an idle report. 

 Had
they fixed on any other man it'd've been nothing; but his perfect
indifference, your pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! T'this
question his daughter replied only with a laugh; as it had been asked
without t'least suspicion, she wasn't distressed by his repeating it. Her
father'd most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Darcy’s
indifference, she could don'thing but wonder at such a want of
penetration,/fear that perhaps, instead of his seeing too little, she
might've fancied too much. Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse
from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Bingley t'do, he was able
t'bring Darcy with him t'Longbourn before many days'd passed after
Catherine’s visit. T'gentlemen arrived early; and, before Bennet'd time
t'tell him of their having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in
momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted t'be alone with Jane, proposed their
all walking out. 

 “Darcy, I am a selfish creature; and, for t'sake of
giving relief t'my own feelings, caren't how much I may be wounding yours.
“I am sorry, exceedingly sorry,” replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and
emotion, “that you've ever been informed of what may, in a mistaken light,
have given you uneasiness. Lydia’s thoughtlessness first betrayed to me
that you'd been concerned in t'matter; and, of course, I could not rest
till I knew t'particulars. 

 Let me thank you again, again, in t'name of
all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you t'take so
much trouble, bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering
them.” 

 Elizabeth, feeling all t'more than common awkwardness, anxiety
of his situation, now forced herself t'speak; immediately, though not very
fluently, gave him t'understand that her sentiments'd undergone so
material a change, since t'period t'which he alluded, as t'make her
receive with gratitude, pleasure his present assurances. The happiness
which this reply produced, was such as he'd probably never felt before; he
expressed himself on t'occasion as sensibly, as warmly as a man violently
in love can be supposed t'do. Had Elizabeth been able t'encounter his eye,
she might've seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused
over his face, became him; but, though she couldn't look, she could
listen, he told her of feelings, which, in proving of what importance she
was t'him, made his affection every moment more valuable. 

 She soon
learnt that they were indebted for their present good understanding
t't'efforts of his aunt, who'd call on him in her return through London,
there relate her journey t'Longbourn, its motive, the substance of her
conversation with Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of
t'latter which, in her ladyship’s apprehension, peculiarly denoted her
perverseness, assurance; in t'belief that such a relation must assist her
endeavours t'obtain that promise from her nephew which she'd refused
t'give. 

 I knew enough of your disposition t'be certain that, had you
been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you'd've acknowledged it
t'Catherine, frankly, openly.” 

 “We'll not quarrel for t'greater share
of blame annexed t'that evening T'conduct of neither, if strictly
examined, will be irreproachable; but since then, we've both, I hope,
improved in civility.” 

 You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how
they've tortured me;--though 'twas some time, I confess, before I was
reasonable enough t'allow their justice.” 

 “T'letter shall certainly be
burnt, if you believe it essential t'the preservation of my regard; but,
though we've both reason t'think my opinions not entirely unalterable,
they'ren't, I hope, quite so easily changed as that implies.” “When I
wrote that letter I believed myself perfectly calm, cool, but I am since
convinced that 'twas written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit.”
T'feelings of t'person who wrote, t'person who received it, are now so
widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant
circumstance attending it ought t'be forgotten. 

 Unfortunately an only
son (for many years an only child), I was spoilt by my parents, who,
though good themselves (my father, particularly, all that was benevolent,
amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught me t'be selfish, overbearing;
t'care for none beyond my own family circle; t'think meanly of all t'rest
of t'world; t'wish at least t'think meanly of their sense, worth compared
with my own. My conscience told me that I deserved no extraordinary
politeness, I confess that I didn't expect t'receive more than my due.”
“My object then was t'show you, by every civility in my power, that I
wasn't so mean as t'resent t'past; I hoped to obtain your forgiveness,
t'lessen your ill opinion, by letting you see that your reproofs'd been
attended to. 

 He then told her of Georgiana’s delight in her
acquaintance, of her disappointment at its sudden interruption; which
naturally leading to t'cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that
his resolution of following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister'd
been formed before he quitted t'inn, that his gravity, thoughtfulness
there'd arisen from no other struggles than what such a purpose must
comprehend. 

 After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, too busy
t'know anything about it, they found at last, on examining their watches,
that 'twas time t'be at home. 

 I told him, moreover, that I believed
myself mistaken in supposing, as I'd done, that your sister was
indifferent t'him; as I could easily perceive that his attachment t'her
was unabated, I felt no doubt of their happiness together.” “Did you speak
from your own observation when you told him that my sister loved
him,/merely from my information last spring?” His diffidence had prevented
his depending on his own judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance
on mine made every thing easy. 

 But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no
longer than he remained in any doubt of your sister’s sentiments.
Elizabeth longed t'observe that Bingley'd been a most delightful friend;
so easily guided that his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself.
In anticipating t'happiness of Bingley, which of course was t'be inferior
only t'his own, he continued t'conversation till they reached t'house.
“My dear Lizzy, where can you've been walking to?” was a question which
Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from
all t'others when they sat down t'table. She anticipated what would be
felt in t'family when her situation became known; she was aware that no
one liked him but Jane; even feared that with t'others 'twas a dislike
which not all his fortune, consequence might do away. 

 Another entreaty
that she'd be serious produced the desired effect; she soon satisfied Jane
by her solemn assurances of attachment. 

 She'd been unwilling t'mention
Bingley; t'unsettled state of her own feelings'd made her equally avoid
t'name of his friend. 

 “Good gracious!” cried Bennet, as she stood at a
window t'next morning, “if that disagreeable Darcy isn't coming here again
with our dear Bingley! Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so
convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be
always giving him such an epithet. As soon as they entered, Bingley looked
at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt
of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, “Bennet, have
you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-
day?” 

 But I hope you won't mind it: 'tis all for Jane’s sake, you know;
there's no occasion for talking t'him, except just now, then. 

 But
whether she were violently set against t'match,/violently delighted with
it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted t'do
credit t'her sense; she could no more bear that Darcy should hear t'first
raptures of her joy, than t'first vehemence of her disapprobation. 

 She
didn't fear her father’s opposition, but he was gonna be made unhappy;
that it should be through her means--that she, his favourite child, should
be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears,
regrets in disposing of her--was a wretched reflection, she sat in misery
till Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved
by his smile. 

 In a few minutes he approached t'table where she was
sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending t'admire her work said in a
whisper, “Go t'your father, he wants you in t'library.” She was gone
directly. 

 Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest, solemn in her
reply; and at length, by repeated assurances that Darcy was really
t'object of her choice, by explaining t'gradual change which her
estimation of him'd undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his
affection wasn't t'work of a day, but'd stood t'test of many months’
suspense, enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer
her father’s incredulity, reconcile him t't'match. 

 Had it been your
uncle’s doing, I must,'d've paid him; but these violent young lovers carry
every thing their own way. Elizabeth’s mind was now relieved from a heavy
weight; and, after half an hour’s quiet reflection in her own room, she
was able t'join t'others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too
recent for gaiety, but t'evening passed tranquilly away; there was no
longer anything material t'be dreaded, t'comfort of ease, familiarity
would come in time. 

 Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first
hearing it, Bennet sat quite still, unable to utter a syllable. 

 This
was a sad omen of what her mother’s behaviour t't'gentleman himself might
be; Elizabeth found that, though in t'certain possession of his warmest
affection, secure of her relations’ consent, there was still something
t'be wished for. 

 But t'morrow passed off much better than she expected;
for Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she
ventured not t'speak to him, unless 'twas in her power t'offer him any
attention,/mark her deference for his opinion. 

 Elizabeth'd
t'satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains t'get acquainted with
him; Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem.
“I admire all my three sons-in-law highly Wickham, perhaps, is my
favourite; but I think I'll like your husband quite as well as Jane’s.”
“My beauty you'd early withstood, as for my manners--my behaviour t'you
was at least always bordering on t'uncivil, I never spoke t'you without
rather wishing t'give you pain than not. Had you not been really amiable,
you'd've hated me for it; but in spite of t'pains you took t'disguise
yourself, your feelings were always noble, just; and in your heart, you
thoroughly despised t'persons who so assiduously courted you. 

 My good
qualities are under your protection, you're t'exaggerate them as much as
possible; and, in return, it belongs t'me t'find occasions for teasing,
quarrelling with you as often as may be; I'll begin directly by asking you
what made you so unwilling t'come t't'point at last. I ain't indebted for
my present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude.
From an unwillingness t'confess how much her intimacy with Darcy had been
over-rated, Elizabeth'd never yet answered Gardiner’s long letter; but
now, having that t'communicate which she knew would be most welcome, she
was almost ashamed t'find that her uncle and aunt'd already lost three
days of happiness, immediately wrote as follows: “I'd've thanked you
before, my dear aunt, as I ought t'have done, for your long, kind,
satisfactory, detail of particulars; but t'say the truth, I was too cross
t'write. But now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein t'your
fancy, indulge your imagination in every possible flight which the subject
will afford, unless you believe me actually married, you cannot greatly
err. 

 Jane wasn't deceived, but she was affected; though feeling no
reliance on her, couldn't help writing her a much kinder answer than she
knew was deserved. T'joy which Darcy expressed on receiving similar
information, was as sincere as her brother’s in sending it. Before any
answer could arrive from Collins,/any congratulations t'Elizabeth from his
wife, t'Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come themselves
t'Lucas Lodge. Catherine'd been rendered so exceedingly angry by
t'contents of her nephew’s letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in
t'match, was anxious t'get away till t'storm was blown over. 

 At such a
moment, t'arrival of her friend was a sincere pleasure t'Elizabeth, though
in t'course of their meetings she must sometimes think t'pleasure dearly
bought, when she saw Darcy exposed t'all t'parading, obsequious civility
of her husband. 

 He could even listen t'William Lucas, when he
complimented him on carrying away t'brightest jewel of t'country,
expressed his hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James’s, with
decent composure. 

 Elizabeth did all she could t'shield him from
t'frequent notice of either, was ever anxious t'keep him t'herself,
t'those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification;
though t'uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from t'season
of courtship much of its pleasure, it added t't'hope of t'future; she
looked forward with delight to t'time when they should be removed from
society so little pleasing t'either, t'all t'comfort, elegance of their
family party at Pemberley. I wish I could say, for t'sake of her family,
that the accomplishment of her earnest desire in t'establishment of so
many of her children produced so happy an effect as t'make her a sensible,
amiable, well-informed woman for t'rest of her life; though perhaps it was
lucky for her husband, who mightn't have relished domestic felicity in so
unusual a form, that she still was occasionally nervous and invariably
silly. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for
her drew him oftener from home than anything else could do. 

 So near a
vicinity t'her mother, Meryton relations wasn't desirable even to his easy
temper,/her affectionate heart. T'darling wish of his sisters was then
gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county t'Derbyshire,
Jane, Elizabeth, in addition t'every other source of happiness, were
within thirty miles of each other. 

 From t'further disadvantage of
Lydia’s society she was of course carefully kept, though Wickham
frequently invited her t'come, stay with her, with t'promise of balls,
young men, her father would never consent t'her going. Mary was t'only
daughter who remained at home; she was necessarily drawn from t'pursuit of
accomplishments by Bennet’s being quite unable t'sit alone. 

 Mary was
obliged t'mix more with t'world, but she could still moralize over every
morning visit; as she was no longer mortified by comparisons between her
sisters’ beauty, her own, 'twas suspected by her father that she submitted
t't'change without much reluctance. 

 He bore with philosophy
t'conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever of
his ingratitude and falsehood'd before been unknown t'her; in spite of
every thing, wasn't wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed
on t'make his fortune. 

 T'congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received
from Lydia on her marriage, explained t'her that, by his wife at least, if
not by himself, such a hope was cherished. I am sure Wickham would like a
place at court much, I don't think we shall have quite money enough t'live
upon without some help. Such relief as 'twas in her power t'afford, by
t'practice of what might be called economy in her own private expences,
she frequently sent them. 

 It'd always been evident t'her that such an
income as theirs, under t'direction of two persons so extravagant in their
wants, heedless of t'future, must be insufficient to their support;
whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of
being applied t'for some little assistance towards discharging their
bills. 

 Their manner of living, even when the restoration of peace
dismissed them t'a home, was unsettled in the extreme. 

 His affection
for her soon sunk int'indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and in
spite of her youth, her manners, she retained all t'claims to reputation
which her marriage'd given her. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there,
when her husband was gone t'enjoy himself in London/Bath; with t'Bingleys
they both frequently staid so long, that even Bingley’s good humour was
overcome, he proceeded so far as t'talk of giving them a hint t'be gone.
Bingley was deeply mortified by Darcy’s marriage; but as she thought it
advisable t'retain t'right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropt all her
resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana, almost as attentive t'Darcy
as heretofore, paid off every arrear of civility t'Elizabeth. Georgiana'd
t'highest opinion in t'world of Elizabeth; though at first she often
listened with an astonishment bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive,
manner of talking t'her brother. 

 By Elizabeth’s instructions, she began
t'comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband which a
brother won't always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than
himself. Catherine was extremely indignant on t'marriage of her nephew;
and as she gave way t'all t'genuine frankness of her character in her
reply t't'letter which announced its arrangement, she sent him language so
abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was
at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth’s persuasion, he was prevailed on
t'overlook t'offence, seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further
resistance on t'part of his aunt, her resentment gave way, either t'her
affection for him,/her curiosity t'see how his wife conducted herself; she
condescended t'wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which
its woods had received, not merely from t'presence of such a mistress, but
the visits of her uncle, aunt from t'city.